ecology of freshwater fish 2016: 25: 678–681 ó 2015 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish letter novelty versus environment: two viewpoints on the same phenomenon? michal janac, marketa konecna, kevin roche, pavel jurajda institute of vertebrate biology, academy of sciences of the czech republic, v.v.i., brno, czech republic accepted for publication january 31, 2015 in his reaction to our paper ‘environment not ‘native- ness’ dictates reproductive trait shifts in ponto-cas- pian gobies’ (konecna et al. 2014), kovac (‘the fish itself, not only environment, should be considered in studying invasion success’; 2015) disagree with what he considers a misinterpretation of his theory of ‘alternative ontogenies and invasive potential’ (herein aoip; kovac 2010). in doing so, he questions the reliability of our results by criticising our methodol- ogy. we would like to take this opportunity to react to both these points. kovac (2015) accuses us of using ‘tests based on improper methods’. every method includes some degree of bias, including those used in our paper, and in every case, their use can and should be questioned. however, while we agree with kovac that ‘hypothe- ses derived from a theory should always be tested with proper methods’, we are also convinced that no one can claim the right to state which methods are ‘proper’ or ‘improper’ without broad consensus and proper discussion. we refute kovac’s criticism as we chose our methods carefully to minimise any possible bias and with due reference to the levels of precision normally required in fish reproduction studies. for example, as we were unconvinced that the gravimet- ric method was a credible means for determining gobiid fecundity (due to the relatively small mass to be weighed), we decided to measure every egg in the ovary instead as it is more reliable, despite being more time-consuming. further, where we were unconvinced that a parameter could be measured/ determined precisely enough (e.g. size of oocytes in the last stage of maturation), we omitted it, despite being aware that the value of our results might be somewhat decreased thereby (see kovac 2015). kovac (2015) criticises our method for determining goby fecundity, that is absolute fecundity (fa) calcu- lated as the absolute number of oocytes in the ovary minus the smallest oocytes (the least numerous group of very small oocytes, i.e. previtellogenic oocytes), which are predicted not to mature. this exact calcula- tion of fecundity, however, was recommended by hunter & macewicz (2003) as having ‘a relative low risk of bias’ given that oocyte distribution is discon- tinuous, with the advanced oocyte class containing more than one spawning batch, clearly the case for gobiids in our study. a similar method was also used by tomczak & sapota (2006), who calculated fa based on ovaries with oocytes in the vitellogenic stage. kovac (2015) himself describes this parameter as ‘the number of eggs potentially spawned during the subsequent spawning season, regardless of the number of spawning batches’. we feel that this is precisely what one should expect from a parameter describing fecundity. in conclusion, we feel that the ‘validity of its application for testing aoip’ has to be questioned using clear arguments, rather than being arbitrarily dismissed. we also see no reason why ‘ano and raf must be examined to make statistical tests of aoip’. to our knowledge, no literature source contains any explanation as to why these two parameters in partic- ular are essential for testing the predictions of aoip. raf (‘the real number of eggs spent within a sea- son’; h^orkova & kovac 2014), is clearly comparable with fa used in our study, that is the potential number of eggs to be spent within a season. while its name suggests the parameter is more precise than fa, its actual precision is question- able. raf is calculated as the number of oocytes for example, correspondence: michal janac, institute of vertebrate biology, academy of sciences of the czech republic, v.v.i., kvetna 8, 603 65 brno, czech republic. e-mail: janac@ivb.cz comments to ‘the fish itself, not only environment, should be considered in studying invasion success’ by kovac (2015). 678 doi: 10.1111/eff.12219 larger than those found in the postspawning period (h^orkova & kovac 2014). the number of batches also plays a role in the calculation of raf; however, this is basically irrelevant as, according to calcula- tions in h^orkova & kovac (2014), the number of batches is considered the same both within and between populations. raf, therefore, is a proxy for batch size, in which the size threshold for mature oo- cytes is based on a population-wide maximum size of vitellogenic eggs following the spawning season. such a calculation, however, presumes that vitello- genic oocytes after the spawning season are the same size as those during the spawning season as, if they were smaller, raf would overestimate batch size in some females. and similarly, we also question the validity of ano (‘the sum of all eggs present in ovaries’; h^orkova & kovac 2014) for predicting the number of offspring. ano cannot serve as a measure for the number of offspring produced in the upcoming spawning season as some of the oocytes will not be released. kovac (2015) himself supports this with his opinion that, in gobiids, ‘the majority of oocytes will mature later, to be spent in subsequent years’. (having read both the papers referenced by kovac [i.e. hunter & goldberg 1980 and hunter et al. 1985], however, we feel that he needs to provide further support for this statement as we found no mention of such a contention by these authors.) we understand that the use of ano makes sense within the context of aoip as it remains constant over the fish’s lifespan and is resistant to external cues (at least that is what we infer from the ano calculation, which assumes no difference between fish [h^orkova & kovac 2014]). we would, however, require clear evidence that ano is a good predictor of the actual number of offspring produced by a female before we would use it and, as with raf, see no reason why ano should be used instead of fa. postspawning prespawning another point raised by kovac (2015) was the pos- sibility that some females may already have spent some of their eggs by the time we sampled our fish. in our samples, every neogobius kessleri and n. mel- anostomus female from both germany and bulgaria had one clearly visible batch of mature or maturing oocytes (1.0–1.8 mm) and one clearly visible group of vitellogenic oocytes (0.4–0.8 mm) representing a possible second, and even third, batch. it is true that mature oocytes were not found in n. fluviatilis; how- ever, this was because the n. fluviatilis spawning sea- son starts considerably later than the two previous species (konecna & jurajda 2012). there is a very high probability, therefore, that all of the females in our study had not yet spent any of their egg batches. the only reliable method for confirming this would be an examination of ovarian histology, and not, as novelty versus environment the collection of insisted by kovac (2015), fish ‘throughout the whole seasonal cycle’. while we admit that the precision of our study would have been increased by an histological examination, such an examination is not yet a standard requirement in studies of fish fecundity. finally, kovac (2015) claimed that our ‘samples cannot be used for valid statistical tests as they were stored in formaldehyde for unequal periods of time’ (1 year versus 6 years). while we agree that formal- dehyde shrinkage can cause bias, we must also point out that this relates only to ‘freshly stored’ samples (obviously not the case in our study). by a process of simple logic, formaldehyde shrinkage cannot be infi- nite; over time, shrinkage must either stop or at least slow down to near-zero. while we are not aware of any study on fish shrinkage on samples greater than 1 year, most studies have shown that shrinkage is most obvious over the first 5 days and then stops after 30–60 days (xiong et al. 2007; santos et al. 2009). paradoxically, therefore, formaldehyde shrink- age imposes greatest bias on those studies that pro- cess samples within the year of sampling. regarding possible misinterpretation of the aoip, this may have originated from a feeling that we tried to ‘disprove’ the whole aoip hypothesis with our results. this was certainly not the case. in fact, we tested only a small part of the aoip hypothesis, that is a prediction that newly established populations will always shift towards generalised (r-selected) life-his- tory traits (lht). perhaps it was unwise of us to con- nect our study solely to aoip as we were testing a phenomenon that is commonly described in the litera- ture, regardless of the theory behind the observation. our only intention in focussing on aoip was to use the precise prediction it provided as a platform for our own study, that is that a population of a non- native species will demonstrate a shift towards an r-selected lht within 5 years (generations) of its first occurrence (h^orkova & kovac 2014; zahorska et al. 2014). this very prediction (in this ‘flattened’ form, i.e. disregarding any possible shift back to a specialised [k-selected] lht within 5 years/genera- tions) was tested by h^orkova & kovac (2014), who used the positive results obtained in their study as support for the aoip hypothesis. to contradict aoip. the fact kovac (2015) mistakenly assumes that our opinion on the role of intraspecific pressure in shaping lht was meant that our results did not show the predicted shift to an r-selected lht simply gave us the opportunity to present our opinions on changes in lht during the colonisation process as a possible explanation for the phenomena observed. there is a general consensus that lht typically change following a species’ introduction into a novel 679 janac et al. area, that is that species change to an r-selected lht early on and shift/return to a k-selected lht at some later time. the only point where we would question aoip as regards this description is not the typical ‘trajectory’ but the mechanism behind the trajectory. we believe that lht are driven solely by biotic and abiotic environmental cues; that is, cues typical for the first years following introduction (e.g. lowered intraspecific pressure) drive r-selected lht, while those typical for later stages (e.g. increased intraspe- cific pressure) drive k-selected lht. follows, therefore, that the lht of each generation (or indi- vidual; see below) will be affected by environmental cues at any given time. such a scenario predicts that if an invading population is experiencing high intra- specific pressure soon after (or at the time of) intro- duction, it will not shift to a more r-selected lht. the unexpected shift in lht observed in three different gobiid species popula- tions, all at the very start of the colonisation process, reported in our paper (konecna et al. 2014) supports such a scenario. lack of shift) (or it if we have interpreted the predictions of aoip cor- rectly, it assumes that the shift in lht is not driven by environmental cues within a novel environment, but by the shift to a novel environment itself; that is, the organism reacts to the act of introduction to an ‘unknown environment’, regardless of the environ- ment into which it is introduced. accordingly, aoip assumes that a shift back to a k-selected lht comes with time, when the change is no longer a change, to paraphrase kovac (2015). such a scenario assumes that the shift to an r-selected strategy in a novel envi- ronment will occur unconditionally. we believe that novelty per se cannot be enough to change an organ- ism’s lht and that our results support this. this is the only point that we question as regards aoip in our paper. we chose the term ‘nativeness’ for the title purely to simplify this concept and, of course, we acknowledge that the exact term is never used in the aoip hypothesis itself; that is why it is always writ- ten with inverted commas. in our view, phenotypic plasticity is not ‘the capacity to respond to novel environments’ (kovac 2015) but simply the capacity to respond to ‘differ- ent environmental parameters’. as subtle as this dif- it is vital for ference may sound, we believe that understanding the difference in viewpoint that has arisen over what happens during the invasion process. here we must stress that at no point in our paper do we dispute the role of phenotypic plastic- ity (as we understand it) in the invasion process. similarly, we are not at odds with the statement that ‘the plasticity of invaders originates from epigenetic mechanisms’ (kovac 2015). indeed, environmentally controlled gene expression (epige- successful 680 netics) presumes that shifts in lht will be, to some extent, controlled by environmental cues, which is our basic premise (see the title of our paper; konecna et al. 2014). it has to be stressed, how- ever, that lht shifts during the invasion process can also be driven by other mechanisms, such as evolution or allocation of resources to reproduction at the expense of somatic growth (copp & fox 2007; fox & copp 2014). also, biotic conditions at the start of the invasion process (i.e. low competi- tion and low predation pressure) may simply result in higher energetic income and lowered expenditure. this, in turn, will lead to rapid growth of juveniles, earlier maturity and improved female condition, which could result in an increase in energy invested into reproduction without the necessity for shifting resource allocation (see gutowsky & fox 2012 for a discussion on this topic). nevertheless, our data clearly show that three dif- ferent gobiid species, very soon after introduction, displayed lht more typically found much later after introduction. we feel that this very fact lends strong support to our contention that ‘time from introduc- tion’ is a surrogate variable. we fully understand that other viewpoints exist, however, and treat them as valid alternatives to our own. obviously, a single case study such as ours is insufficient for making a decision as to which viewpoint is closer to the truth. for this, one needs more extensive studies compar- ing, for example, lht of populations that vary in both local environmental conditions and time of introduction, as well as multiple native populations under a range of environmental conditions. references copp, g.h. & fox, m.g. 2007. growth and life history traits of introduced pumpkinseed (lepomis gibbosus) in europe, and the relevance to its potential invasiveness. in: gherardi, f., ed. biological invaders in inland waters: profiles, distri- bution and threats. dordrecht: springer, pp 289–306. fox, c.j. & copp, g.h. 2014. old world versus new world: invader introduced life-history alterations in a successful across europe. oecologia 174: 435–446. gutowsky, l.f.g. & fox, m.g. 2012. intra-population vari- ability of life-history traits and growth during range expan- sion of the invasive round goby, neogobius melanostomus. fisheries management and ecology 19: 78–88. h^orkova, k. & kovac, v. 2014. different life-histories of native and invasive neogobius melanostomus and the possi- ble role of phenotypic plasticity in the species’ invasion suc- cess. knowledge & management of aquatic ecosystems 412: 01. hunter, j.r. & goldberg, s.r. 1980. spawning incidence and batch fecundity in northern anchovy, engraulis mordax. fishery bulletin - national oceanic and atmosphere admin- istration 77: 641–652. hunter, j.r. & macewicz, b.j. 2003. improving the accuracy and precision of reproductive information used in fisheries. in: report of the working group on modern approaches to assess maturity and fecundity of warm- and cold-water fish and squids. bergen, norway 4-7 september 2001. kjesbu, o. s., j. r. hunter and p. r. witthames, editors. fisken og havet. nr. 12-2003, pp. 57-68. hunter, j.r., nancy, c.h., lo, n.c.h. & leong, r.j.h. (1985) batch fecundity in multiple spawning fishes. in: las- ker, r. (ed.) an egg production method for estimating spawning biomass of pelagic fish: application to the north- ern anchovy, engraulis mordax. national oceanic and atmospheric administration technical report nmfs 36, u.s. department of commerce, springfield, va, pp. 67–77. konecna, m. & jurajda, p. 2012. population structure, condi- tion, and reproduction characteristics of native monkey goby, neogobius fluviatilis (actinopterygii: perciformes go- biidae), in the bulgarian danube. acta ichthyologica et pisc- atoria 42: 321–327. konecna, m., janac, m., roche, k. & jurajda, p. 2014. envi- ronment not ‘nativeness’ dictates reproductive trait shifts in ponto-caspian of freshwater fish, doi:10.1111/eff.12180. gobies. ecology novelty versus environment kovac, v. 2010. developmental plasticity and successful fish invasions. in: proceedings of 17th international conference on aquatic invasive species, 29 august – 2 september 2010, san diego, 159. kovac, v. 2015. the fish itself, not only environment, should be considered in studying invasion success. ecology of freshwater fish. santos, j.n.s., araujo, f.g. & silva, d.s. 2009. length cor- rection for early-juvenile brazilian herring sardinella janeiro (eigenmann, 1894) after preservation in formalin, ethanol and freezing. neotropical ichthyology 7: 87–92. tomczak, m. & sapota, m. 2006. the fecundity and gonad development cycle of the round goby (neogobius melano- stomus pallas, 1811) from the gulf of gdansk. oceanologi- cal and hydrobiological studies 35: 353–367. xiong, m., rosenthal, h., que, y., qiao, y. & chang, j. 2007. shrinkage of gobiocypris rarus, procypris rabaudi, and sinilabeo rendahli preserved in formalin. journal of applied ichthyology 23: 173–176. zahorska, e., kovac, v., svolıkova, k. & kapusta, a. 2014. reproductive parameters of topmouth gudgeon (pseudorasb- ora parva) from a heated lake lichenskie (poland). central european journal of biology 9: 2012–2219. 681  