eculogy of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 53-56 printed in denmark. all rights resewed copyright 0 munksgaard 1997 freshwater fish ecology of short communication observations on the reproductive biology of female hypostomus luetkeni lac8p6de 1803 issn 0906-6691 mazzoni r, caramaschi ep. observations on the reproductive biology of female hypostomus luetkeni lacbpkde 1803. ecology of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 53-56. 0 munksgaard, 1997 r. mazzoni', e. p. caramaschi2 'universidade do estado do rio de janeiro, ib dept. de biologia animal e vegetal, rio de janeiro, *universidade federal do rio de janeiro, ib. dept. de ecologia, rio de janeiro, brazil abstract - seasonal observations in the gonadosomatic index and develop- ment stages of female ovaries showed that hypostomus luetkeni has an ex- tended spawning period lasting from september to february. histological ex- aminations and analysis of oocyte size distributions indicated a fractional spawning. fecundity was determined in ripe ovaries and indicated that h. luetkeni, as most other loricariidae, spawn a small number (446-936 eggs.ind") of large eggs (5.2 mm). key words: neotropics; armoured catfish; hypostomus luefkenf; reproduction rosana mazzoni, universidade do estado do rio de janeiro, dept. de biologia animal e vegetal, rua slo francisco xavier 524, pavilhlo haroldo lisboa, cep 20559-900, rio de janeiro, brazil accepted for publication january 10, 1996 un resumen en espaiiol se incluye detrais del texto principal de este articulo. introduction according to mazzoni, caramaschi & weber (1994), the distribution of "cascudo lageiro" (hy- postomus luetkeni lackpcde, 1803 j is restricted to the river paraiba do sul basin (southeastern brazil). recent investigations by caramaschi (1991) and mazzoni (1993) indicated that h . luetkeni is the sev- enth dominant species in abundance (out of 88 fish species) and the third most abundant armoured cat- fish in the lower reaches of this river basin where it is subjcct to fishery. since no information has ever been reported on its life history, this article investi- gates its reproductive patterns with particular refer- ence to females. study area, material and methods the river paraiba do sul rises up at about 1,800 m a.s.1. in the serra da mantiqueira and runs down for about 1,000 km in a north-northeast direction until its mouth into the atlantic ocean (fig. 1 j. its discharge basin (ca. 57,000 km2) is located between 21" 00'- 22" 15' s and 41 " 10'43" 5' w, within the states of rio de janeiro and minas gerais (southeastern bra- zil, fig. 1). the annual rainfall in this region is over 1,500 mm with a maximum in the summer (novem- ber-march) coincident with the warmest environ- 210 430 42' fig. 1. geographical location of the river paraiba do sul with indxation of the sample sites in the river paraiba proper and in the rightand left-side tributaries. 53 mazzoni & caramaschi table 1. macroscopic characteristics of the ovarian maturity stages in female hyposfornus luefkeni. stages external appearance immature i ii mature i 111 mature11 iv ripe v recovering ovaries small ( ~ 0 . 0 1 g), slender and transparent. ovaries occupy less than 15% of body cavity, pale cream colour with subtle granulation. ovaries occupy up to 50% of body cavity, yellow colour with light vascularization. large light yellow oocytes visible to the naked eye. ovaries occupy up to 85% of body cavity. large yellow oocytes 5.43 mm), ovaries strong vascularized, orange in colour with thin ovarian wall. ovaries occupy less than 20-40% of body cavity, flacid and slightly vascularized. table 2. cytological characteristics of oocytes in primary (pgp) and secondary growth phases (sgp) of h. luefkeni. phases cytological characteristics primary growth phase (pgp) i chromatin nucleolar ii perinuclear scant ooplasm and a central nucleus with single basophilic nucleolus. abundant basophilic ooplasm, numerous perinu- clear nucleolus, yolk nuclei, epithelial cell layer, follicular layer surrounding oocyte. secondary growth phase (sgp) 111 yolk vesicle iv vitelogenesis v mature nucleus with irregular outline, numerous yolk vesicles on the cortical ooplasm, thin acellular layer (zone radiata) externally to epithelial layer. cortical ooplasm granular (vitelogenic material), folicullar layer increase in size, zone radiate as in the above phase. nucleus in a peripherical position without discern- able cover, ooplasm completely granular, zone radiata very thin, folicullar layer very developed. mental temperatures (average 24"c, maximum 35°c) and a minimum in winter (june-august) when tem- perature is lower (average 15°c). between march 1989 and february 1990, we sampled monthly in the lower reaches of the paraiba do sul proper, and in the rivers paraibuna, pomba and muria& (tributaries on the left) and in the rivers piabanha and dois rios (tributaries on the right) (fig. 1). sampling sites were selected to include most, if not all, the variability of the river habitats. these are: river channel with rocky bottom, sandy areas on the banks and muddy bottoms with riparian vegetation. fishes were captured with gill and seine nets (mesh size 15-70 mm). as a whole, 376 females were collected but standard length (l, 0.1 cm), total weight (w. 0.1 g) and gonad weight (gw, 0.1 g) were measured on 323 females only. prior to preser- vation of the gonads, we established a preliminary maturity scale. this was based on the size, colora- 54 tion, swelling and vascular irrigation of the ovaries and on the presence, size and coloration of the eggs. then, ovaries were fixed either on modified gil- son's fluid (bagenal, 1978) for egg measurements or in 10% buffered formalin or bouin solution for his- tological examinations. ovaries of adult females were assessed to be into one of a five-stage scale (table 1). this scale was based on the variations of the macroscopic morphol- ogy and confirmed by histological examination of the ovaries. these were processed by routine tech- niques (cf. vazzoler, 1981). maturation stages of the gonads were determined by the relative frequencies of the oocyte phases, whose description is detailed in table 2. these phases were distinguished by both the morphology of the oocytes and the reactivity to hematoxylin and eosin staining as indicated in table 2. such classification was based on wallace & sel- man (1981). the annual gonad cycle was determined by the variations in the gonadosomatic index [gsi=loo* gw/w] and by the frequency distributions of the gonadal maturity stages. in addition, the patterns of oocyte development were determined by their size distributions. these were measured on subsamples of 10 ml each under a stereomicroscope (x50). fe- cundity (bagenal 1978) or the total number of phases iv and v eggs was determined in 21 ripe fe- males. results the seasonal variations of the mean gonadosomatic index (gsi) are shown in fig. 2. gsi increases from a m 16 a a a 8 t i i 8 4- a m/j j/a s/o n/d j/f m/a fig. 2. seasonal variations of the gonadosomatic index (gsi) of hypostomus zuetkeni females from the river paraiba do sul. month a 50 -i i 4 m/j j/a s/o n/d j/f m/a months fig. 3. seasonal variations in the frequency of gonadal stages in female hypostomus luetkeni from the river paraiba do sul. stages are: mature i (a), mature i1 (b), ripe (c) and recovery (d). winter average (may-june) of about 0.6 (max=1.7) to about 8.7 (max=19.5) at the beginning of the sum- mer (november-december) and sharply declines to 2.3 (max=12.2) in march-april. however, the vari- ance observed in the monthly samples showed a large inter-individuals variation, suggesting that ma- ture females occur over a ten month period. seasonal variations in the frequency of the ova- rian stages are characterized by a continuous re- placement of oocytes from immature (phase i and ii), to yolk vesicule oocytes (phase iii), then vitello- genic oocytes (phase iv) and finally mature oocytes (phase v). all the ovaries observed in march-april were at stages 111, iv and v. ovaries in stage iv (ripe) were present all the year around except in may-june and occurred most frequently from sep- tember to february. also, ovaries in stage v (recov- ering) were detected all along the year (fig. 3). par- tially spent ovaries were typically recognized by histological examination. this revealed the presence of post-ovulatory follicles among phase v oocytes. in contrast, the histological analysis of spent ovaries showed post-ovulatory follicles alongside primary and secondary phase oocytes only. size frequency distributions of oocytes ~ 0 . 3 mm from maturing females (fig. 4) varied from unimo- dal distributions (cf. early maturing stage=stage 11) to bimodal distributions in ripe females (cf. stage reproduction of h. luetkeni iv). also, the comparison of egg size from pre- served gonads with those from histological slides suggested that the larger eggs of the upper modes in ripe ovaries (stage iv, table 2, fig. 4) correspond to those oocytes in phase iv (vitellogenic) and v (ma- ture). such a coupled processes suggested a multi- ple and rather long spawning period. fecundity (f) was determined in 21 ripe females captured in december. the number of ripe eggs (phases iv and v) increased significantly with fe- male length (l) and weight (w) according to: and f=-912.0+6.85 l (n=21, r2=0.86) f=195.4+1.43w (n=21, r2=0.5 1 ) and the mean size of these mature oocytes was 5.2 mm (range 4.8-5.5). discussion despite the importance of gsi in determining the spawning time of fish populations (le cren 1951), the monthly analysis of the maturity stages showed to be a more accurate indicator of spawning in this neotropical armoured catfish h. luetkeni. this anal- ysis allowed for the identification of a long repro- ductive period lasting practically all year with a maximum in september-february. this was charac- terized by certain asynchronicity in the individual spawning. 1 1 / 0 3 0 9 1 5 2 1 2 7 3 3 3.9 4 5 5 2 5.5 oocytes diameter (mm) fig. 4. size-frequency distributions of oocyte sizes in immature (a), maturing i (b), maturing i1 (c), ripe (d) and partially spent (e) ovaries of hypostomus luetkeni from the river paraiba do sul. 55 vitelogeno en ovarios maduros, aumenta linealmente con la lon- gitud de las hembras (f=-912.0+6.85 l; n=21, r’=0.81) y el tamatlo medio de 10s 6vulos es 5.2 mm. las caracteristicas re- productivas de h. luetkeni parecen ser similares a las de otras especies prdximas de esta familia. acknowledgements this research was carried out at the laboratory of fish ecology, ufrj (brazil) and was supported by “convenio furnas-en- gevixkjfrj”. warm thanks are due to the staff of this labora- tory and to n.f. verani and j.r. verani for field and further sup- port; to inemet for environmental data and to the coordena- doria de aperfeifonamento de pessoal de ensino superior (capes) for a master grant to rm. valuable comments by two anonymous referees substantially improved an early draft of this article. references azevedo, p. 1938. 0 cascudo dos aqudes nordestinos plecosto- mus plecostomus. arquivos do instituto de biologia (sio paulo) 9: 211-224. bagenal, t. b. 1978. aspects of fish fecundity. in: bagenal, t.b., ed. methods for the assesment of fish production in fresh waters. blackwell scientific publications. ibp n. 3. caramaschi, e. p. 1991. levantamento da ictiofauna do n o paraiba do sul e ciclo reprodutivo das principais espccies, no trecho compreendido entre tr&s rios e campos. univer- sidade federal do rio de janeiro. furnas-engevix/ ufrj. vol. 1: 1-269. le cren, e. d. 1951. the length-weight relationship and sea- sonal cycle in gonad weight and conditions in the perch percajuviatilis. journal of animal ecology 20: 201-219. mazzoni, r. 1993. estratcgia reprodutiva de duas espccies de hy- postomus lackpcde, 1803 (osteichthyes, loricariidaej do tre- cho inferior do rio paraiba do sul, rio de janeiro. master the- sis. univ. federal do rio de janeiro, dept. de ecologia. i30 p. mazzoni, r. & caramaschi, e. p. 1995. size structure, sex ratio and onset of sexual maturity of two species of hypostomus lackpcde, 1803 (osteichthyes, loricariidaej. journal of fish biology 47: 841-849. mazzoni, r., caramaschi u., & weber c., 1994. taxonomical revision of the species of hypostomus lactpkde, 1803 (sil- uriformes, loricariidaej from lower rio paraiba do sul, rio de janeiro, brazil. revue suisse zoologie 101: 1-16. vazzoler, a. e. de m. 1981. manual de mctodos para estudos biol6gicos de populagiies de peixes; reproduqio e cresci- mento. cnpq. programa nacional de zoologia, brasilia. bra- d . 108 pp. wallace, r. a. & selman k., 1981. cellular and dynamic as- pects of oocyte growth in teleosts. american zoologist 21: 325-343. mazzoni & caramaschi the histological examination of the ovaries, cou- pled with the size-frequency distributions of oo- cytes, indicated the presence of two size modes in ripe ovaries. these remained for as long as the spawning period and suggested that h. luetkeni is a fractional spawner with two batches of eggs to be released in a spawning season. fractional spawning in teleost fishes usually de- scribes a group-synchronous oocyte development with successive oocyte batches being recruited from the yolk vesicle stage (wallace & selman, 1981). this pattern was not observed in h. luetkeni. in con- trast, after a first recruitment of oocytes into second- ary phase, two batches of oocytes in different phases of development grow together being released subse- quently after the complete maturation. such mode was not described by wallace & selman (1981) and therefore, no nomenclature was proposed. since this mode of oocyte development is neither asynchro- nous nor group-synchronous (sensu wallace & sel- man, 1981), we named it as a “two batches group- synchronous”. thus, the development of h. luetkeni oocytes dif- fer from the one presented by its sympatric and con- generic species h. afinis which, in contrast, exhib- its an asynchronous development (mazzoni, 1993). nonetheless, the fecundity of h. luetkeni is similar to other reported loricariidae species (azevedo, 1938), which are characterized by a small number (~2,500) of large eggs (5-6 mm). this might be in- dicative of parental care behaviour (mazzoni & car- amaschi 1995). resumen 1. el “cascudo lageiro”, hypostomus luetkeni lac$pcde, 1803, es un loricariido (loricariidaej cuya distribucidn se limita a1 rio paraiba do sul, entre 10s estados de rio de janeiro y mi- nas gerais, al sudeste de b r a d . es abundante en las zonas bajas de esta cuenca y en sus afluentes, donde estudiamos la biologia de su reproduccibn. 2. observaciones estacionales del indice gonado-somitico y de 10s estadios de desarrollo de 10s ovarios, mostraron que esta po- blacidn mantiene un periodo reproductivo largo que dura, a1 menos, desde septiembre hasta febrero. observaciones histd- logicas, junto a anilisis de distribuciones de tamafios de h h s , tambih indicaron que la puesta es fraccional. 3. la fecundidad, determinada sobre el nlimero de odcitos con 56  