ecology of freshwarer fish 1997: 6: 16-26 printed in denmark . all righls reserved conrrrwht 0 munkrauurd i997 ecology of freshwater fish issn 0906-6691 effects of predation and intraspecific interactions on habitat use and foraging by brown_trout in artificial streams greenberg la, bergman e, eklov ag. effects of predation and intraspecific interactions on habitat use and foraging by brown_trout in artificial streams. ecology of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 16-26. 0 munksgaard, 1997 abstract - we studied habitat use, foraging rates and behavior of 10 cm and 12 frutfa, at two densities, 1.5 and 3.0 fish . m-’, in ar- cm long brown_trout, s&zo tificial streams that contained either the amphipod, gummarus pulex, alone or g. pulex together with the piscivore, northern pike, esox lucius. gammarus were stocked in and largely restricted to the pools at a density of 128 gam- murus.m-’. pool;’. large trout (12 cm) used pools more and riffles less when small trout (10 cm) were present than when small trout were absent. small trout consumed fewer gammarus when together with large trout than when alone, but showed no difference in habitat use in the presence and absence of large trout. habitat use and number of gammarus consumed per trout were not affected by trout density for either size-class when alone. for both size-classes of trout, use of pools and foraging rates were higher in the absence than in the presence of pike, and pike primarily resided in the pools. the number of aggressive inter- actions by both size-classes of trout decreased when pike was present. our re- sults indicate that for habitats that differ in food resources and predation risk, size structure may affect habitat use and foraging by brown_trout. l. a. greenberg, e. bergman, a. g. eklov department of ecology, limnology, university of lund, sweden key words: habitat use; foraging; intraspecific interactions; body size: salmo_trutta; esoxlucius; pike: brown_trout; gammarus pulex l. a. greenberg, department of ecology, limnology, ecology building, university of lund, s-223 62 lund, sweden accepted for publication february 22, 1996 un resumen en espaiiol se incluye detrhs del texto principal de este articulo. species that vary greatly in body size may show ma- jor size-dependent differences in morphology, ecol- ogy and behavior, depending on body size (werner & gilliam 1984). as a result, interactions among conspecifics may be complex. resource competition may be expected to be most intense between con- specifics that are similar in size, whereas interfer- ence competition may be expected from conspecif- ics that are more dissimilar in size (polis 1988). if size differences are great enough, large individuals may even prey on smaller conspecifics (werncr & giiliam 1984, werner 1986). this means that in such species, studies of intraspecific interactions should consider both interactions between similar- sized individuals as well as between individuals that differ in size. body size also affects vulnerability to predators. for fishes, large individuals are relatively invulnera- ble to gape-limited predators, resulting in variable effects of predation on intraspecific competition, ei- ther intensifying or reducing it among prey (werner et al. 1983, mittelbach & chesson 1987, mittelbach 1986, 1988). for example, werner et al. (1983) found that in the presence of piscivorous largemouth bass (microperus salmoides), the smallest bluegill sunfish (lepornis macrochzrus), which were vulner- able to bass predation, were restricted to vegetated areas where they experienced intense intraspecific competition. larger sunfish, on the other hand, which were invulnerable to bass predation, escaped competition from the smaller bluegills by using open water habitats. in deciding where to forage, animals must con- sider both potential foraging gains and predation risk (cerri & fraser 1983, werner et al. 1983, power, matthews & stewart 1985, werner & hall 1988). this has led to the development of a number of models regarding habitat selection by foragers in 16 habitats with different foraging gains and predation risks (gilliam & fraser 1987, 1988, ludwig & rowe 1990). gilliam & fraser (1988) developed a model, based in part on ideal free models of habitat selection, for two size-classes of foragers that varied in vulnerability to predation. they concluded that asymmetries in predation risk or competitive ability between size-classes generally result in habitat spe- cialization by the size-classes if there are habitat- specific differences in the asymmetry. the purpose of this study was to study intraspe- cific size-class competition in brown_trout (sulmo truttu). brown_trout arc highly aggressive fish in which dominance is largely determined by body size or age (jenkins 1969, bachman 1984). we also studied how the presence of the piscivore, northern pike (esax lucius), a known predator of brown_trout (naslund 1992), affected interactions within and be- tween two size-classes of brown_trout, both of which were vulnerable to pike predation. responses by trout were quantified by measuring their habitat use, foraging rate and different aspects of their be- havior. this study was conducted in artificial streams stocked with the amphipod, gummurus pulex, a prey commonly consumed by trout (new- man & waters 1984). material and methods two separate experiments were conducted in the ar- tificial streams. in the first experiment, hereafter re- ferred to as the density experiment, we tested the ef- fects of fish density and predation on habitat use and foraging rates of similar-sized trout. in the second experiment, hereafter referred to as the size-class experiment, we tested the effects of predation and size and density on habitat use, foraging rates and behavior of two size-classes of trout. artificial streams the experiments were conducted in four indoor, ar- tificial streams described in greenberg (1 992). the four streams were connected together in one series, with water from the last stream emptying into a res- ervoir (4.5~1 sxo.5 m), before being pumped back to the first stream with a submersible pump, deliver- ing 6.5 1. s-'. approximately half of the water was removed and replaced with fresh tap water every 1-2 weeks. each stream, which was constructed from 5- mm pvc plastic, consisted of a 0.5x0.7 m head box followed by three major habitats, a riffle, a run, and a pool. the habitats, which were 1.5 m long and 0.7 to 1.6 m wide, depending on habitat, could be si- multaneously isolated from one another by releasing drop gates that were suspended about 30 cm over habitat use and foraging by trout the water. because the bottom of the run and pool was rounded in cross-section, these habitats could be further divided into deeper central portions and shallower margins, which could also be isolated from each other with drop gates. however, for the experiments reported here the shallower portions of the run and pool were made unavailable to the ani- mals by leaving the drop gates in place, i.e., not sus- pending them. this was done so that g. pulex would be unable to use the tracks to the drop gates as ref- uges from trout. the mean ( f l sd) depth and sur- face current velocity in the artificial streams.were 4 3 0 . 7 cm and 33.9f12.3 c d s in the riffle (range: 3.5-6 cm and 249.2 c d s ) , 6.7k1.6 cm and 26.9f16.1 c d s in the run (range: 4-9.5 cm and 2- 49.0 c d s ) and 24.7f15.6 cm and 8.2f5.7 c d s in the pool (range: 6-46.5 cm and 2-21.3 c d s ) . the bottom of the riffle and run was covered by a 2- to 3- cm thick layer of gravel (mean and sd diameter of 17f6 mm) overlain by four cobbles (mean and sd diameter of 19+2 cm) per habitat, which the fish could use as shelter. the bottom of the pool was covered by sand only. animals a total of 270 hatchery trout and 6 wild pike were used in the experiments. the pike were from lake krankesjon in scania, southern sweden. the trout were domestic trout (according to the definition of moyle 1969) that originally came from the nissan river, halland county, sweden. trout were maintained in two 1000-liter holding tanks, with continuous water flow delivered by a small submersible pump from the reservoir. after flowing into the tanks, the water returned to the res- ervoir via an outlet pipe. fecal material and uneaten food were collected in filters located just below the outflow from the holding tanks. trout were nor- mally fed commercial trout pellets. however, one week before the experiments began the trout were trained on live g. pulex, which they readily con- sumed. trout were also trained to recognize pike as a predatory threat by placing them in the artificial streams together with pike for 1-2 days prior to commencement of trials with pike. pike were accli- mated to the artificial stream environment several weeks before being used in the experiments. while held in captivity, pike were fed live trout and an oc- casional crucian carp (curussius carassius). for the density experiment 100 trout, averaging 10.8k0.4 cm (1 sd) total length (range: 10.1-11.5 cm) were used. for the size-class experiment 70 10.0k0.8 cm trout (range: 7.5-10.8 cm) and 100 12.of0.5 cm trout (range: 11.1-12.9 cm) were used. pike aver- aged 36.0 cm in total length (range 32.042.0 cm). 17 greenberg et al. we stocked each of the pools of our streams with 250 individuals of the amphipod, g. pulex. g. pulex were collected from an unnamed tributary to klin- gavalsin creek, located in scania, southern swe- den. they averaged l l .9f2.2 mm in length or 4.4 f2.3 mg in dry weight (n=30). experimental design density experiment. this experiment, which was conducted between 27 february 1992 and 12 march 1992, consisted of six replicates of four treatments: 6 trout, 6 trout+l pike, 12 trout, and 12 trout+l pike. this corresponded to trout densities of 1.5 and 3.0 trout. m-2. pike were held in two of the streams for the first four replicates and then moved to the other two streams, with approximately 1 week's acclima- tization period before completing the remaining two replicates. the number of trout placed in the four streams alternated from six on one day to 12 on the next day. the same trout were never used two days in a row, and experiments were never run more than two consecutive days, followed by at least 2 days where no experiments were performed. this was done to avoid stomach-flushing the same individuals too often. trout were starved for approximately 24 h prior to stocking in the artificial streams. g. pulex were restricted to the pools so that trout would have to forage in the pools where pike occurred. this was accomplished by leaving the drop gates down and turning off the pump when trials were not being conducted. the day before the very first trial was run, 250 g. pulex were stocked in the pools of each stream. all trials began by placing trout in the riffles, with the drop gates down to prevent dispersal to the other habitats. pike had already been in the pools for sev- eral weeks. after 15 minutes, the drop gates were raised and suspended above the streams, allowing fish to move between habitats. the gates were re- leased 4 h later, and the trout in each of the three habitats were collected and counted. trout were stomach flushed, and the number of g. pulex eaten by each fish was counted. stomach-flushing of juve- nile brown_trout has been shown to be 100% effec- tive at removing stomach contents, with no side-ef- fects on condition or growth of the fish (twomey & giller 1990). a 4-h study period was used for two reasons. first, we wanted to be able to accurately measure food intake, without the confounding effects of prey being digested. second, we wanted g. pulex to be concentrated in the pool so that trout would have to face a foraging gaidpredation risk conflict. al- though short in duration, the study period was long enough to show significant treatment effects on food 18 intake and habitat use (see results). furthermore, the trout did not appear stressed during our behav- ioral observations; they did not rest motionless on the bottom nor did they "pace" back and forth in the streams. finally, habitat use by trout in the presence of pike in this study resembled results from previous studies with trout and pike conducted in the same artificial streams in which the study period was 24- 48 h (greenberg 1992, 1994; see discussion). after each trial we searched the headboxes be- tween streams and found a mean f l sd of 9.4f12.9 g. pulex that had escaped from the streams; we re- turned them directly to the stream just upstream of the headbox in which they were collected. addi- tional g. pulex, equivalent to the number consumed by the trout, were also placed into each stream im- mediately after each trial. all trials began and ended between 1040 and 1500 h. the average minimum and maximum temperature during each 4 h trial pe- riod, was 13.3fo.7"c and 14.2f0.6"c, respectively, with the extremes being 12.6 and 15.2"c. the number of g. pulex remaining in the streams was counted after the fourth and sixth replicate was performed. the pump was turned off, and g. pulex were collected from the streams using handnets. additional animals were then retrieved from the gravel and cobbles after removing them from the streams. those g. pulex missing after the fourth replicate were replaced to bring the total back up to 250 g. pulex per stream. size-class experiment. this experiment was based on a design that was originally used to compare the effects of interspecific and intraspecific competition (underwood 1986). we used this design to compare the effects of between and within size-class in- traspecific competition in the presence and absence of a piscivore. the experiment, which was con- ducted between 30 march 1992 and 18 may 1992, consisted of 10 treatments. the treatments were 6 small trout, 12 small trout, 6 large trout, 12 large trout, and 6 small trout+6 large trout, conducted both in the presence and absence of pike. the exper- iments without pike were run first to ensure that we had enough trout to complete all trials. previous ex- periments have shown that habitat use is not af- fected by the temperatures experienced during this experiment (greenberg 1994). moreover, foraging rates would be expected to be higher during the pike experiments when temperatures were higher, which should bias the data in favor of not showing a preda- tor effect (see below for temperatures). for both the piscivore-free and piscivore trials, the five size and density treatments were randomly assigned to each artificial stream with the stipula- tions that (1) one replicate of all treatments was run within two days of each other, (2) only one replicate of a given treatment was run on a given day, and (3) the treatments were assigned to the four artificial streams so that the number of replicates of each treatment run in each stream was nearly the same to reduce biases due to differences among streams. six replicates were performed for all treatments with pike and seven or eight replicates were run for the treatments without pike. the larger number of repli- cates for the treatments without pike was due to the fact that we changed how behavioral observations were conducted; extra treatments were conducted so that behavioral observations were replicated six times. as in the density experiment, the same trout were never used two days in a row, and experiments were never run more than two consecutive days, fol- lowed by at least two days without running trials. trout were starved for approximately 24 h prior to stocking in the artificial streams. pike were held for two weeks in the streams prior to conducting trials. the procedure for this experiment was similar to the density experiment except that the trials lasted 3 h. gammarus pulex were stocked in the artificial streams after each trial to compensate for those that were eaten by the trout (determined by stomach- flushing) and that had escaped into the headboxes between streams. all trials began and ended be- tween 0800 and 1255 h. the average minimum and maximum temperature during each 3 h trial period, was 12.9f1.6"c and 13.8+1.4"c, respectively, dur- ing the experiments without pike (range: 11.3- 153°c) and 15.lf.9"c and 15.8+ l.l"c, respec- tively, during the experiments with pike (range: 1 3 .ti- 17.1 "c) . the pike in two of the streams swam actively and consumed a total of 2 and 5 trout during the seven trials. the pike in a third stream was less active and only consumed 1 trout during all trials. we never observed movement by the pike in the last stream and trout, which were often found in the pool, were never consumed by the pike. consequently, we re- placed this pike after two trials, but the new pike was also inactive. for the last trial we replaced this pike. this third pike was active, and trout avoided the pool. habitat use, movement patterns and agonistic in- teractions were observed between the second and third hour of the experiment. one observer stood at the rifflehn junction and the other at the down- stream end of the pool, enabling us to observe most of the stream area at one time (there was always a clear view of the riffle/run and run/pool juncture). the observer approached the streams slowly and stood nearly motionless, either on the floor or on a platform above the streams, to avoid disturbing the trout. trout in each stream were observed for two habitat use and foraging by trout nonconsecutive, 5-min observation periods, sepa- rated by a 30-min period without observations. dur- ing each minute of observation, we counted the number of movements between habitats and all ago- nistic interactions. at the end of each 5 minute ob- servation period we counted the number of trout in each habitat. because of the lack of structure in the pool, all trout in the pool could be counted, whereas counts were less reliable in the riffle and run. con- sequently, we calculated the amount of time spent in pools rather than the other habitats, based on the fi- nal number of trout in the pool at the end of each 5- min period and the number of movements at the end of each minute. aggressive interactions were classi- fied as chasing, biting, pirouetting, paralleling and avoidance. chasing and biting were characterized by a trout rushing towards another trout. when this episode ended with the aggressor nipping at the other fish, this behavior was called biting. if the at- tacked fish simply fled, it was termed a chase. if two fish looked at each other, resulting in one of the fish leaving, this was called avoidance. pirouetting in- volved two fish chasing each other in a tight circle, whereas paralleling involved two fish moving side- by-side of each other, often with elevated fins. be- havior of each size-class of trout was distinguished in the treatments with both size-classes together. the number of g. pulex remaining in the streams was counted twice, once after the trials without pike were completed and again after the trials with pike. we replaced the g. pulex that were missing from the streams before beginning trials with pike. statistical analysis three-way contingency table analysis, based on log-linear models, was used to analyze the distribu- tions of trout. in different analyses, we tested for ef- fects of size-class composition, density, predation risk and habitat on the distribution of the trout. to test for the significance of an interaction term, one generates two tables, one with the interaction term included and one without it. the difference between g-values generated from these two tables is used to test the significance of the term being left out (sokal & rohlf 1981). because analysis of the multi-way tables requires testing a large number of models, and thus increases the probability of making a type one error, we adjusted the overall alpha to be 0.05, using the bonferroni adjustment (sokal & rohlf 1981). because the number of trout used in each treatment was small (6 or 12 fish), replicates within each treatment were pooled before subjected to sta- tistical testing. although analyses were conducted on number of trout, data in fig. 1 are presented as proportions to facilitate comparisons. no more than 19 greenberg et al. table 1. results of three-way contingency table analysis, testing the effects of trout density, predation risk, and habitat on the distribution of brown_trout in artificial streams. the g-value for the interaction term is the likelihood ratio chi-square for the difference between a model containing all interaction terms and one that excludes the specified interaction. bonferroni alpha is 0.017. ns=p>o.05. ~ comparison density-predation risk-habitat interaction density-habitat interaction predator-habitat interaction riffie vs pool run vs pool df 2 2 2 2 2 g 2.83 0.65 55.7 53.1 20.8 p ns ns <0.005 <0.005 c0.005 one trout was consumed during a trial; conse- quently, habitat use and foraging data were not ad- justed for this loss. for small trout in the size-class competition experiment, three-way contingency ta- ble analysis showed a significant predation riskxsize compositionxhabitat interaction (table 2). conse- quently, we made separate two-way tests of inde- pendence. results density experiment there was no effect of trout density but there was an effect of the predator on habitat use by trout (table 1). the predator effect was due to brown_trout using riffles to a greater extent and pools to a lesser extent when pike was present than when pike was absent (fig. 1, upper panel). pike were al- ways observed in pools. of the trout that con- sumed g. pulex, 78% were in the pools when pike was absent and 36%45% were in the pools when pike was present (fig. 2, upper panel). two-way anova of the mean number of g. pulex eaten per fish (log-transformed) showed an effect of predation risk (f,,,,=102.3, pco.0001) but no effect of fish density (f,,,,=2.2, f50.14) and no interaction between predation risk and fish density (f,,,,=0.4, p ~ 0 . 5 ) (fig. 3, upper panel). the pres- ence of pike caused trout to reduce its consumption of g. pulex by one order of magnitude (fig. 3, up- per panel). moreover, only a few trout individuals accounted for most of the g. pulex that were con- sumed. in the absence of pike one third of the trout consumed, on average, 79% of the g. pulex. when pike was present, even fewer individuals accounted for most of the g. pulex that were consumed. ex- cluding those pike trials where no g. pulex were consumed, one-third of the trout consumed an aver- age of 90% of the g. pulex that were consumed. at the end of the experiment, we recovered, on av- erage, 89%+10% (1 sd) of the g. pulex in the pools, 20 no predator n ftj 100 density experiment 801 a 2 a a 2 a a 2 a a 2 a a 2 a a 2 a riffle run pool 100 size class experiment small trout 1 80 60 40 20 0 80 60 40 a t 2 a a t 2a a t 2 a a t 2a a t 2a a t 2a riffle run pool size class experiment large trout ha f 20 n " a t 2 a a t 2 a a t 2 a a t 2 a a t 2 a a t p a riffle run pool fig. i . mean proportion of trout (fl se) in the riffle, run and pool for the two experiments. white histobars (both hatched and unhatched) show treatments without the predator and black histobars (both hatched and unhatched) show treatments with the predator. a=size-class alone (6 fish); 2a=size-class alone but at twice the density (12 fish); t=both size-classes together (6 fish of each size-class). upper panel. proportion of trout in the density experiment. middle panel. proportion of small trout in the size-class experiment. lower panel. proportion of large trout in the sile-class experiment. which indicates that we were fairly successful in re- stricting g. pulex to the pools. more than 250 g. p u l a were recovered in one stream, suggesting transfer between two streams (from the penultimate to the last stream upstream of the reservoir). exclud- ing these two streams, we found an average of 204f31 g. pulex in the streams without pike and 186+41 g. pulex in the streams with pike. this sug- gests that pike consumed g. pulex at an average rate of 3.4 g. pulex per day, based on the difference in table 2. results of three-way contingency table analysis, testing the effects of trout composition (size and density), predation risk, and habitat on the distribution of brown_trout in artificial streams. the gvalue for the interaction term is the likelihood ratio chi-square for the difference between a model containing all that excludes the specified interaction. note that the significant predator-composition-habitat interaction for small trout in the size-class experiment precluded testing additional multivariate contingency models and thus separate g-tests were performed within each factor. bonferroni alpha of 0.017 is the critical value. ns=a0.017. interaction terms and one trout size small comparison composition-predation risk-habitat interaction predator alone (a) together (t) double alone (2a) density effect (a vs 2a) no predator predator size-class effect (a vs t) no predator predator large composition-predation risk-habitat interaction composition-habitat interaction density effect (a vs 2a) size-class effect (a vst) predator-habitat interaction riffle vs pool run vs pool df 4 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 4 4 4 4 2 3 3 g 17.2 8.7 5.4 40.4 1.3 1.4 0.7 1.9 6.1 13.0 8.9 13.2 77.6 57.0 13.2 p <0.003 <0.017 <0.0001 ns ns ns ns ns <0.005 ns <0.017 t0.005 <0.005 <0.005 p<0.068. loss rates between treatments with and without pike and the number of days pike were together with g. pulex. size-class experiment predation risk had a significant effect on the distri- bution of small trout in the absence of large trout (p.co.014 for a and 2a treatment, bonferroni’s al- pha=0.017), but was not significant in the presence of large trout (p<0.068 for t treatment, bonfer- roni’s alpha=0.017) (table 2). the small trout re- sponded to pike by decreasing their use of pools and increasing their use of riffles (fig. 1 middle panel). neither density nor the presence of large trout af- fected habitat use by small trout (table 2). in the absence of pike, large trout used pools more and riffles and runs less than small trout. in the presence of pike, habitat use by large trout resem- bled habitat use by small trout, with large trout us- ing pools to a lesser extent and riffles to a greater ex- tent when pike was present than when absent (table 2, fig. 1 lower panel). there was also a significant composition-habitat interaction, which was attribut- able to a significant effect of size-class, but not den- habitat use and foraging by trout 1001 80 60 40 20 0 80 60 40 20 0 100 80 60 40 20 0 density experiment 11 a 2a a 2a size class experiment small trout 48 a t 2a a t 2a size class experiment large trout 47 1 40 t 2a a no predator a t 2a predator fig. 2. percentage of trout that had eaten g. pulex, combined for all replicates, that were captured in the pools. upper panel. trout in the density experiment, middle panel. small trout in the size-class experiment. lower panel. large trout in the size- class experiment. numbers above histobars are the total number of fish that consumed g. pulex for each treatment. symbols and histobar patterns are the same as in fig. 1. sity (table 2). large trout used riffles to a lesser ex- tent and pools to a greater extent when together with small trout than when alone (a vs t comparison, fig. 1 lower panel) small time spent in pools differed among the six treat- ments (three treatments with pike and three without) (kruskal-wallis: h=21.2, with pc0.0008, d f 5 ) and the six treatments with large trout (h=19.7, p<0.0015, df=5). both small and large trout spent more time in pools when pike was absent than when pike was present. moreover, there 21 trout greenberg et al. i density experiment c v) ii l a> n w t ~ cd c3 l a, d e 3 z s i a 3 2a size class experiment small trout a 2a 1 t  € 0 a t 2a a t 2a size class experiment larae trout a t 2a no predator a t 2a predator fig. 3. mean number of g. pulex eaten per trout (fl se) for the two experiments. note the different scales for the y-axis. up- per panel. mean number eaten by trout in the density experi- ment. middle panel. mean number eaten by small trout in the size-class experiment. lower panel. mean number eaten by large trout in the size-class experiment. dashed lines in the middle and lower panel show the average number of g. pulex that were eaten during the first trial of each treatment. see fig. 1 for definition of a, t, and 2a. was more variation among trials in the time spent in pools for those treatments containing pike (mann- whitney comparing quartile deviations among treat- ments with and without pike, u,,,=36, p<0.05). of the trout that consumed g. pulex, between 50 22 large f1,,,=147.9, pco.0001; two-way anova of the number of g. p d e x eaten per fish (log(x+l )-transformed) revealed an effect of predation risk for both size-classes (small trout: trout: f1,,,=755.5, p<o.oool), an effect of size-class com- position but only for small trout (small trout: f2,,,=4.7, p<0.017; large trout: f, 31=0.8r p>0.4), and no predation risk x size-class composition inter- action (small trout: f,,,,=0.5, b0.64; large trout: fl,,,=l.8, b0.17) for either size-class of trout. pre- dation risk caused the number of g. pulex consumed per fish to decrease by an order of magnitude for both small and large trout (fig. 3, middle and lower panels). the size-class cornposition effect was due to a lower foraging rate by small trout when in the presence of large trout (fig. 3, middle panel). and 85% were in the pools at the end of the experi- ments when pike was absent and 0-25% were in the pools when pike was present (fig. 2 middle and lower panels). pike were always found in the pools at the end of each trial. during the behavioral obser- vations, however, we observed a pike in the run on one occasion. as in the density experiment, a few individuals consumed most of the g. pulex, and this effect was more pronounced when pike was present than when absent. in the absence of pike one-third of the trout, both small and large, consumed an average of 66% of the total number of g. pulex that were consumed. in the presence of pike and excluding those trials where no g. pulex were consumed, one third of the trout consumed an average of 95% of the total num- ber of g. pulex that were consumed. the mean number of habitat changes per fish dur- ing the combined 10 minutes of observations during each trial ranged from 0.13 to 0.62 for small fish and 0.14 to 0.77 for large trout. two-way anova of these data (log (x+l) transformed) revealed no ef- fect of predation risk, size-class composition, or predation riskxsize-class composition interaction for small or large trout (p>o. 1 for all comparisons). most aggressive interactions involved chasing and biting. two-way anova of the total number of aggressive interactions per fish (log(x+l )) revealed a significant effect of predation risk (f,,43=7.0, p<0.012) but no effect of size-class composition .7, p>o. 16) or predation risksize-class (f4,43=1 composition interaction (f4,,,=0.3, b0.89). preda- tion risk caused the number of aggressive interac- tions to decrease for all five size and density combi- nations of trout. the average number aggressive in- teractions for the five size and density combinations of trout decreased from 0.7f0.7 (1 sd) per fish per 10 min of observations in the absence of pike to 0.3f0.2 per fish per 10 min of observations when pike was present. in addition, most aggression oc- curred in pools; when pike was absent 94% of all in- teractions occurred in the pools, whereas when pike was present, 57% of all interactions occurred in pools. when both size-classes were together, 81- 90% of the aggression involved a large trout acting upon a large or small trout. interactions where small trout acted upon another trout occurred less fre- quently, only 10-19% of the total number of aggres- sive acts observed. at the end of the experiment, we recovered, on average, 95%+8% (1 sd) of g. pulex in the pools, which indicates that we were successful in restrict- ing g. pulex to the pools. in the absence of pike we collected an average of 206 g. pulex (158-253) in the 4 streams, but when pike was present we col- lected an average of 84 g. pulex (54-133). assum- ing the natural mortality of g. pulex was the same during the periods with and without pike, we esti- mate that pike consumed on average 11 g. pulex per day, a value more than three times greater than 06- served in the density experiment. discussion i ntraspecific effects in general, the closer in size that two size-classes are, the more likely exploitation competition is to occur and the less likely interference competition between size-classes will succeed (polis 1988). in our study, doubling the density from 1.5 to 3.0 trout-m-* had little effect on habitat use or forag- ing rate of individuals within a size-class. thus it seems that competitive pressure did not differ markedly between the two trout densities tested in this study. density has been shown to affect habi- tat use by fishes in other studies (moyle & baltz 1985, heggenes 1990). our lack of an effect is probably attributable to the narrow range of densi- ties tested. in a previous study with brown_trout conducted in the same artificial streams, but cover- ing a broader range of trout densities, from 0.2 to 4.5 trout-mp2, an effect of density was found (greenberg 1994). even if we found little evidence of a density ef- fect, we did observe large individual variation in foraging rate, with only a few individuals account- ing for most of the g. pulex that were consumed. brown_trout are well known for their aggressivity and usually set up territories or form dominance hierarchies (kalleberg 1958, jenkins 1969, bach- man 1984, fausch & white 1986). huntingford, metcalfe & thorpe (1993) found for a related salmonid, sulmo satup; that dominant parr ate more food particles than subordinate parr. it is un- clear whether the short duration of our experi- habitat use and foraging by trout ments permitted establishment of territories or dominance hierarchies. however, aggression was frequently observed and it seems likely this may have contributed to this individual variation in for- aging rate. the relatively small difference of 2 cm in average length of small and large trout was large enough to produce size-specific differences in aggression, for- aging rate and habitat use. for example, small trout used shallow habitats (riffles) more and deep habi- tats (pools) less than large trout. a direct relation- ship between trout size and water depth has been previously observed in the field (heggenes 1989; greenberg, svendsen & harby 1996) and has been attributed to interactive segregation, presumably mediated through aggression between size-classes, although predation may also contribute to these dif- ferences (bohlin 1977). our results indicate that se- lective segregation may also be involved. this is be- cause small trout used shallow habitats more than large trout, whether or not large trout were present. however, some form of interaction between size- classes appears to be operating as large trout used deep water habitats to a greater extent when small trout were present than when they were absent. the strongest evidence we have for size-class competi- tion comes from our foraging rate data. small brown_trout ingested fewer g. pulex when large trout were present than when they were absent. this reduction in consumption of g. p u l a was likely due to inter- ference from large trout, which were more aggres- sive than small trout when both size-classes were to- gether. predation effects the direct effects of predation risk included altered habitat use and decreased food intake by brown_trout. trout increased their use of shallow riffles when the piscivore was present, resulting in a greater overlap in habitat use among individuals. such predator-mediated habitat shifts are well de- scribed for fishes from small, warm water streams (fraser & emmons 1984, schlosser 1987, power 1987, harvey 1991) but less so for cold water stream fishes (but see huntingford, metcalfe & thorpe 1988a, greenberg 1992, 1994). one inter- esting consequence of this concentration of fish in the shallower habitats was a reduction in the num- ber of aggressive interactions. the reduction in ag- gression was probably due to the trout being forced to direct much of their attention towards the preda- tor, but may also relate to the more complex habitat structure found in the riffles. complex habitat struc- ture should facilitate visual isolation among indi- viduals, even if the resulting trout densities were 23 greenberg et al. higher in the riffles than in the pools (kalleberg 1958, chapman 1966). another consequence of this habitat shift was the large decrease in the number of g. pulex consumed by brown_trout. this reduction in consumption is to be expected as c. pulex were restricted to the pools. interestingly, food intake by brown_trout appeared to be very sensitive to the physical presence of a predator, regardless of the piscivore’s activity. for example, during the seven trials in the stream with the inactive pike that never consumed trout, 5 1 % of the trout, pooling over all size and density combina- tions, were found in the pool at the end of these tri- als, which contrasts with the remaining 23 trials in which 14% of the trout were found in the pool. de- spite this difference in habitat use, there was no ap- preciable difference in consumption of gammurus (median of 1 gammarus eaten per trial with the in- active pike vs median of 0 gammarus eaten per trial in the other trials). this result is consistent with data obtained from atlantic salmon (salmo salur) in which even brief exposure to a model predator re- duced food intake (mills 197 1, metcalfe, hunting- ford & thorpe 1987, huntingford, metcalfe & thorpe 1988b). further, these results suggest that both the presence and activity of the piscivore, which varied between pike individuals, have differ- ent effects on habitat use and foraging by trout. our results also suggest that piscivore odors were not a sufficient stimulus to elicit differences in habi- tat use and foraging by brown_trout in the artificial streams. in the density experiment, piscivore and pi- scivore-free treatments were run simultaneously, whereas in the size-class experiment, they were run separately. this means that piscivore odors should have been present in the piscivore-free treatments in the density experiment but not in the size-class ex- periment. however, no significant differences in habitat use (a treatment: g=1.9, p>0.3, df=2; 2a treatment: g=0.7, z30.6, df=2) and foraging (a treatment: t=1.7, p>o.l, df=l1; a treatment: t=0.5, p>0.6, df=12) were noted between trout in the den- sity experiment and small trout in the size-class ex- periment. in fact, trout in the density experiment ate on average slightly more gammarus than in the size-class experiment (5.6 vs 4.0 gammarus per fish in the a treatment and 4.0 vs 3.8 gammarus per fish in the 2a treatment). the large loss of g. pulex in the presence of pike in the size-class experiment makes it unclear as to whether pike primarily affected brown_trout forag- ing and habitat use directly through its roll as a pis- civore or indirectly through its consumption of gammarus. however, if one looks at the results for the first trial in the size-class experiment when the number of gammarus in the streams should have 24 been the same for trials with and without pike, trout still ate considerably more gammarus in the ab- sence than in the presence of pike (fig. 3). there was, nevertheless, an effect of the reduced number of gammarus in the streams with pike on trout for- aging. trout ate, on average, more g. pulex during the first trial conducted for each treatment with pike (small trout: 1.0 g. pulex; large trout: 1.8 g. pulex) than during the last trial (small trout: 0.1 g. pulex; large trout: 0.3 g. pulex). habitat use might also have been affected by the large loss of g. pulex. however, this does not seem to be the case. if one compares habitat use by small trout in the presence of pike in the size-class experiment with habitat use by the similar sized trout in the presence of pike in the density experiment, there were no significant differences (a treatment: g=o, p=l; 2a treatment: gz1.12, p>o.s; fig. 1). thus our data suggest that pike in the size-class experiment had a large direct impact on trout consumption and habitat use, even if they did affect trout foraging indirectly by consum- ing g. pulex. one of the purposes of this study was to deter- mine how trout would react when the habitat with the greatest foraging reward also had the highest risk of predation. clearly the presence of the pisci- vore caused the trout to trade off foraging gains for increased survival. presumably a starvation period longer than one day would have resulted in the trout taking greater risks (godin & smith 1988). simi- larly, varying the potential foraging gains should also alter habitat use. we can examine the effect of different foraging gains by comparing this study with previous studies conducted in these artificial streams in which no food was present (greenberg 1992, 1994). the comparison is not totally fair as there are some differences in methods (such as dura- tion of the trials and number of piscivores). never- theless, a comparison of these studies shows that habitat use was similar when pike were present but differed in the absence of pike. the similar habitat use in the presence of pike indicates that predation risk may have outweighed potential foraging bene- fits. the reason for this may be related to the low densities of g. pulex used in this study. an initial density of 128 individuals.m-’.pooi-’ is low com- pared with gammarus densities in the field (nilsson 1977, holomuzki & hoyle 1990). the difference in habitat use in the absence of pike was due to a greater number of trout using pools stocked with g. pulex (this study) than lacking gammarus (green- berg 1992, 1994). we believe this difference was due to brown_trout being able to evaluate habitat- specific foraging gains and alter their habitat use ac- cordingly. care must be taken when applying these labora- tory results to field conditions. first, the artificial streams are reduced in scale relative to natural streams and confine fish, thereby preventing dis- persal (schlosser 1987). second, the short duration of the experiments may have precluded establish- ment of territories or dominance hierarchies, and thereby affected our results. habitat use in the pres- ence of pike resembles results from earlier studies of longer duration, but results did differ in the ab- sence of pike, which may reflect the short duration rather than our interpretation that trout were able to quickly evaluate habitat-specific foraging gains. third, only one species of benthic macroinverte- brate, g. pulex, was used, whereas many different taxa would have been present in a natural stream. furthermore, g. p u l a was constrained to pools, which may not be its preferred habitat. finally, hatchery trout may behave differently than wild trout. other studies have reported different dietary habits, growth rates and survival for hatchery and wild trout, suggesting that hatchery trout do not do well under field conditions (o’grady 1983, berg & jqrgensen 1991, fjellheim, raddum & barlaup 1995). it is unclear whether the patterns we ob- served would have differed if we had used wild trout instead of hatchery trout. we reduced the most obvi- ous potential hatchery effects by training the trout to eat gammarus and to avoid pike, and hatchery trout managed to do both. furthermore, a previous study conducted in the same artificial streams revealed no difference in habitat use between wild trout and the same stock of hatchery trout used in this study (greenberg 1992). in this study, we examined how habitat use and foraging by trout were affected by size-class corn- position, density and predation when trout’s food was concentrated in one habitat. thus, for habitats that differ in food resources and predation risk, size structure may affect habitat use and foraging by brown_trout. for other resource distributions, how- ever, patterns of habitat use and foraging may differ. further work looking at how size-class interactions are affected by different resource distributions is needed. this will require manipulation of food re- sources, conducted not only in the laboratory as in this study but also in the field. resumen 1. en corrientes artificiales con gammarus pulex, o g. pulex junto con el piscivoro esox lucius, estudiamos la utilizacidn de habitat, las tasas de alimentacidn y el comportamiento de indi- viduos de salmo_trutta de 10 y 12 cm, a dos densidades distintas (1.5 y 3.0peces.m?). 2. gammarus fuc introducido en - y restringido a - las pozas a una densidad de 128 gammarus . m-*.poza-’. en presencia de habitat use and foraging by trout 10s individuos menores (10 cm), 10s mayores (12 cm) utilizaron mas las pozas y menos las comentes. en presencia de 10s may- ores, 10s menores consumieron menos gammarus que cuando estuvieron solos. sin embargo, no mostraron una utilizacidn diferente del habitat en presencia o ausencia de 6stos. 3. la utilizacidn del habitat y la cantidad de gammarus consu- midos por individuo no estuvieron influenciados por la densidad de truchas de ambos tamaiios por separado. para ambos tama- iios, tanto el us0 de las pozas como las tasas de forage0 fueron mayores en ausencia que en presencia de e. lucius, que, a su vez, permanecid fundamentalmente en las pozas. el n6mero de interacciones agresivas entre ambos tamafios de s. trutta dismi- nuyd en presencia de e. lucius. 4. nuestros resultados ponen de manifiesto que, para habitats con diferentes fuentes de alimentacidn y distintos riesgos de predacibn, el tamaiio de 10s individuos de s. trutta influye en el us0 del habitat y en la alimentacidn. acknowledgements we appreciate carl-arne croneland’s and einar kristiansen’s help in designing and building the artificial streams. a special thanks goes to the department of resources engineering for al- lowing us to house the streams at v-house. we thank tomas jonsson and the students in the 1992 aquatic ecology course for help in collecting the data in the density experiment. chris- ter bronmark, neil metcalfe and an anonymous reviewer pro- vided helpful comments on an earlier version of this manu- script, and the swedish state power board generously sup- ported this research. references bachman, r. a. 1984. foraging behavior of free-ranging wild and hatchery brown_trout in a stream. transactions of the american fisheries society 113: 1-32. berg, s. & jcirgensen, j. 1991. stocking experiments with o+ and i+ trout parr, satmo trutta l., of wild and hatchery ori- gin. 1. post-stocking mortality and smolt yield. journal of fish biology 39: 151-170. bohlin, t. 1977. habitat selection and intercohort competition of juvenile sea-trout salmo_trutta. oikos 29: 112-1 17. cem, r. d. & fraser, d. f. 1983. predation and risk in foraging minnows: balancing conflicting demands. american natural- ist 121: 552-561. chapman, d. w. 1966. food and space as regulators of salmo- nid populations in streams. american naturalist 100: 345- 357. fausch, k. d. &white, r. j. 1986. competition among juveniles of coho salmon, brook_trout, and brown_trout in a laboratory stream and implications for great lakes tributaries. transac- tions of the american fisheries society 115: 363-381. fjellheim, a., raddum, g. g. & barlaup, b. t. 1995. dispersal, growth and mortality of brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.) stocked in a regulated west norwegian river. regulated rivers: re- search & management 10: 137-145. fraser, d. f. & emmons, e. e. 1984. behavioral response of blacknose dace (rhinichthys atratulus) to varying densities of predatory creek chub (semotilus atromaculatus). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 41: 364-370. gilliam, j. f. & fraser, d. f. 1987. habitat selection under pre- dation hazard: test of a model with foraging minnows. ecol- ogy 68: 1856-1862. gilliam, j. f. & frdser, d. f. 1988. resource depletion and hab- itat segregation by competitors under predation hazzard. in: 25 greenberg et al. ebenman, b. & persson, l., ed.. size-structured populations. berlin: springer-verlag. godin, j.-g. j. & smith, s. a. 1988. a fitness cost of foraging in the guppy. nature 333: 69-71. greenberg, l. a. 1992. the effect of discharge and predation on habitat use by wild and hatchery brown_trout (salmo_trutta). regulated rivers: research & managment 7: 205-212. greenberg, l. a. 1994. effect of predation, trout density and discharge on habitat use by brown_trout, salmo_trutta, in arti- ficial streams. freshwater biology 32: 1-1 1. greenberg, l. a., svendsen, p. and harby, a. 1996. availability and use of microhabitat by brown_trout and grayling in the river vojmin. regulated rivers: research & management 2: 287-303. harvey, b. c. 1991. interaction of abiotic and biotic factors in- fluences larval fish survival in an oklahoma stream. cana- dian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 48: 1 4 7 6 1480. heggenes, j. 1989. physical habitat selection by brown_trout (salmo_trutta) in riverine systems. nordic journal of fresh- water research 64: 64-90 heggenes, j. 1990. habitat utilization and preferences in juve- nile atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) in streams. regulated riv- ers: research & management. 5: 341-354. holomuzki, j. r. & hoyle, j. d. 1990. effect of predatory fish presence on habitat use and die1 movement of the stream am- phipod, gammarus minus. freshwater biology. 24: 509-5 17. huntingford, f. a,, metcalfe, n. b. & thorpe, j. e. 1988,. feeding motivation and response to predation risk in atlantic salmon parr adopting different life history patterns. journal of fish biology 32: 777-782. huntingford, f. a., metcalfe, n. b. & thorpe, j. e. 1988b. choice of feeding station in atlantic salmon, salmo_salar, parr: effects of predation risk, season and life history strategy. journal of fish biology 33: 917-924. huntingford, f. a., metcalfe, n. b. & thorpe, j. e. 1993. social status and feeding in atlantic salmon salmo_salar parr: the ef- fect of visual exposure to a dominant. ethology 94: 201-206. jenkins, t. m. jr. 1969. social structure, position choice, and micro-distribution of two trout species (salmo_trutta and sdmo gairdneri) resident in mountain streams. animal be- havior monographs 2: 56123. kalleberg, h. 1958. observation in a stream tank of territorial- ity and competition in juvenile salmon and trout (salmo_salar l. and s. trutta l.). reports from the institute of freshwater research, drottningholm 39: 55-98. ludwig, d. & rowe, l. 1990. life-history strategies for energy gain and predator avoidance under time constraints. ameri- can naturalist 13.5: 686-707. metcalfe, n. b., huntingford, f. a. & thorpe, j. e. 1987. the influence of predation risk on the feeding motivation and for- aging strategy of juvenile atlantic salmon. animal behavior 35: 901-911. mills, d. 1971. salmon and trout: a resource, its ecology, con- servation and management. edinburgh: oliver & boyd. mittelbach, g. g. 1y86. predator-mediated habitat use: some consequences for species interactions. environmental biol- ogy of fishes 16: 159-169. mittelbach, g. g. 1988. competition among refuging sunfishes and effects of fish density on littoral zone invertebrates. ecol- ogy 69: 614-623. 26 mittelbach, g. g. & chesson, p. l. 1987. predation risk: ef- fects on fish populations. in: kerfoot, w.c. & sih, a,, ed. predation: direct and indirect impacts on aquatic communi- ties. hanover, nh: university press of new england, pp. 315-332. moyle, p. b. 1969. comparative behavior of young brook_trout of domestic and wild origin. progressive fish culturist 31: 51-59. moyle, p. b. & baltz, d. m. 1985: microhabitat use by an as- semblage of california stream fishes: developing criteria for instream flow determinations. transaction of american fish- eries society 114: 695-704. newman, r. m. & waters, t. f. 1984. size-selective predation on gammarus pseudolimnaeus by trout and sculpins. ecol- ogy 65: 1535-1545. nilsson, l. m. 1977. energetics and population dynamics of gammarus pulex l. amphipoda. ph. d. dissertation, univer- sity of lund, sweden. naslund, i. 1992. [brown_trout in running waters; habitat re- quirements, density regulation and stocking - a review] in- formation from sotvattenslaboratoriet 3: 43-82 (in swedish with english summary). o’grady, m. f. 1983. observations on the dietary habits of wild and stocked brown_trout salmo_trutta l. in irish lakes. jour- nal of fish biology 22: 593-601. polis, g. 1988. exploitation competition and the evolution of interference, cannibalism and intraguild predation in age/ size-structured populations. in: ebenman, b. & persson, l., ed. size-structured populations. berlin: springer-verlag. power, m. e., matthews, w. j. & stewart, a. j. 1985. grazing minnows, piscivorous bass, and stream algae: dynamics of a strong interaction. ecology 66: 1448-1456. power, m. e. 1987. predator avoidance by grazing fishes in temperate and tropical streams: importance of stream depth and prey size. in: kerfoot, w. c. & sih, a., ed. predation: di- rect and indirect impacts on aquatic communities. hanover, nh: university of new england press, pp. 333-351. schlosser, i. 1987. the role of predation in age- and size-related habitat use by stream fishes. ecology 68: 65 1-659. sokal, r. r. & rohlf, f. j. 1981. biometry. san francisco: w. h. freeman, 8.59 pp. twomey, h. & giller, p. s. 1990. stomach flushing and individ- ual panjet tattooing of salmonids: an evaluation of the long- term effects on two populations. aquaculture and fisheries management 21: 137-142. underwood, t. 1986. the analysis of competition by field ex- periments. in: kikkawa, j. & anderson, d. j., ed. commu- nity ecology: pattern and process, melbourne: blackwell, pp. 240-268. werner, e. e. 1986. species interactions in freshwater fish com- munities. in: diamond, j. & case, t.j. eds. community ecol- ogy. cambridge: harper & row, pp. 344-358. werner, e. e. & gilliam, j. f. 1984. the ontogenetic niche and species interactions in size-structured populations. annual review of ecology & systematics 15: 393425. werner, e. e. & hall, j. f. 1988. ontogenetic habitat shifts in the bluegill sunfish (lepomis macrochirus): the foragingrate- predation risk tradeoff. ecology 69: 1352-1366. werner, e. e., gilliam, j. f., hall, d. j. & mittelbach, g. g. 1983. an experimental test of the effects of predation risk on habitat use in fish. ecology 64: 1540-1548.  