ecology of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 5946 printed in denmark. all rights reserved copsright d munksgaard 1997 ecology of freshwater fish issn 0906-6691 distrib itioil of and reproductive isolation among color morphs of a rock-dwelling lake victoria cichlid (haplochromis nyererei) seehausen 0. distribution of and reproductive isolation among color morphs of a rock-dwelling lake victoria cichlid (haplochromis nyererei). ecology of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 59-66. 0 munksgaard, 1997 abstract - the geographical and macro- and microhabitat distribution of and mate recognition among color morphs of a complex of lake victoria cichlids were studied. the distribution of most morphs was mutually exclusive, but two morphs overlapped extensively and differed only in microhabitat require- ments. coloration differences between them were inherited, and wild fishes were homozygous in this respect. positive morph-assortative female mate choice was demonstrated. over the largest part of their common geographical range, intermediate phenotypes are absent and the two morphs are to be con- sidered two biological species. however, in populations at one end of the range, intermediate phenotypes with continuously varying male coloration make up the majority of the individuals. it is suggested that the status of color morphs as phenotypes of one species or as separate biological species is a function of environmental conditions that vary considerably between the lo- calities. the data support the hypothesis that polymorphisms can be a step preceding speciation in cichlid fish. un resumen en espafiol se incluye detras del texto principal de este articulo. 0. seehausen section of dynamic morphology and section of ecology, institute of evolutionary and ecological sciences, leiden university, leiden, the netherlands key words: assortative mating; cichlids; haplochromis; lake victoria; polymorphism; sympatric speciation ole seehausen, section of dynamical morphology and section of ecology, institute of evolutionary and ecological sciences, leiden university, p.o. box 9516,2300 ra leiden, the netherlands accepted for publication december 15,1995 introduction the extraordinary diverse cichlid species flocks of the east african great lakes confront ecologists and taxonomists with considerable problems in identifying biological species. species recognition among haplochromine cichlids, which comprise over 99% of the cichlid species in lakes victoria and malawi, relies heavily on the anatomy of the feeding apparatus. after several cases of presumed polychromatism in “morphospecies” turned out to represent complexes of sexually isolated sibling species (holzberg 1978, marsh, ribbink & marsh 198l), it became practice among researchers on lakes victoria and malawi to regard anatomically similar forms that differ distinctly in nuptial colora- tion as different species (marsh et al. 1981, ribbink et al. 1983, ribbink 1986, witte & witte-maas 1987). this is based on the assumption that nuptial coloration determines mate choice and thus ensures reproductive isolation (ribbink et al. 1983, dom- iney 1984, goldschmidt & de visser 1990). several authors, however, questioned the reliability of trophic morphology and coloration as species recog- nition criteria and suggested that polymorphisms and/or hybridization may explain a part of the phe- notypic variability encountered in the cichlid flocks (crapon de caprona & fritzsch 1984, meyer 1987). neither hybrid inviability nor infertility were re- corded when species of lake victoria cichlids were crossed in the laboratory (crapon de caprona 1986, seehausen unpublished). sibling species of rock-dwelling cichlids of lake malawi have been subject to different studies (holzberg 1978, marsh et al. 1981, mckaye et al. 1982, 1984). the existence of a comparable assem- blage of rock-restricted cichlids in lake victoria be- came known recently (van oijen et al. 1981). since research on them intensified in 1990, the number of known species increased rapidly (seehausen 1992, 59 seehausen 1994, 1996, seehausen & bouton 1997), and sev- eral complexes of anatomically very similar pheno- types have been discovered. i describe here such a complex of phenotypes, that should be considered different species on the basis of the coloration criterion. i tested the assump- tion that they are reproductively isolated by study- ing distribution and behavior. thus, i tested their status as biological species and the reliability of the coloration criterion in species recognition. material and methods the fishes haplochromis nyererei witte-maas & witte 198.5 is one of the few rock-dwelling lake victoria cichlids that are described, it appears now to be just one phe- notype out of a complex of forms that are anatomi- cally similar but differ strikingly in male nuptial coloration. among the rock-dwelling cichlids of lake victoria, the h. nyererei complex can be de- fined by a combination of the following characteris- tics: straight to moderately incurved dorsal head profile, lower jaw length 38 to 47% of head length in adults, lower jaw lengtldwidth ratio 1.2 to 2.1, 2- 5 inner tooth rows, a gap between the outer and the first inner tooth row, a rounded dental arcade, small deeply embedded chest scales, conspicuous and reg- ular vertical bar pattern (zebra-like appearance) at least in females (one exception, see table 1) with between 5 and 8 bars between the pectoral fin and the caudal end of the dorsal fin. color morphs are defined as groups of phenotypes that differ dis- tinctly and discretely in male nuptial coloration from all other such groups. vertical bars on the flanks were counted between the pectoral fin (in- cluding the bar passing along or just behind the fin insertion) and the caudal end of the dorsal fin on photographs of live fish taken immediately after capture. in the f1 fishes, bars were counted on live individuals that were not photographed. distribution fishes of the h. nyererei complex were collected at 30 localities in the western speke gulf, the mwanza gulf and the sengerema region of lake victoria (tanzania; fig, 2). positive and negative associa- tions among the different morphs were tested with the chi-square test of joint probability after simp- son, roe & lewontin (1960). their microdistribu- tion was determined by sampling different water depths with monofilament gill nets and line and hook, and crevices between rocks with line and hook. 60 color inheritance and mate recognition individuals of two sympatric morphs, each from two populations (python island in the mwanza gulf [both morphs] and makobe island [zebra morph] and ruti island [red morph] in the speke gulf) were transferred into the laboratory and bred. environ- mentally induced coloration and homozygosity of wild-caught fishes were tested for. female mate choice experiments were then con- ducted with laboratory-reared f1 individuals. fe- males were separated from males 2 to 3 weeks be- fore the experiments. gravid females were then given the choice between sexually active males of the two morphs. two experimental designs were used. first, a female was positioned in the central one of three 50 cmx30 cmx30 cm glass aquaria. two males (one of each morph) were keeping spawning pits each in one aquarium on either side of the female (visual contact experiment). second, two males (one of each morph) were kept in a 160 cmx.50 cmx40 cm aquarium with an artificial rock habitat, by placing a visual barrier so that the aquarium was divided into two halves, males were made to occupy each one half as a territory. a gravid female was then introduced into the tank (di- rect contact experiments). in the visual contact ex- periments, courtship behavior was scored for 15 minutes, in the direct contact experiments for 30 minutes after introduction of the female. in the first case females were removed after 1.5 minutes; in the second case they were left with the males until they had spawned. the frequency of male courtship in all intersexual encounters and the frequency of positive female response to male courtship (“fol- low”) were quantified and the spawnings counted. in visual contact experiments, the female’s choice was inferred from her relative responsiveness to the two males. females were selected for their apparent repro- ductive readiness, typified by swelling of abdomen and urogenital opening (mcelroy & kornfield 1990). males were selected for having close to equal standard length and condition factor, calcu- lated as 1ooxweight (g)/standard length (cm)’ (mi- linski & bakker 1990). they were considered ready for testing after they had created a spawning pit by pushing out gravel from under the stones. in visual contact experiments, six females from each geo- graphical region (three of each morph) had to choose between two pairs of males from the same region (each consisting of one male of each morph). each experiment was conducted twice. in direct contact experiments four females of each region (two of each morph) had to choose between one pair of males (one of each morph) from the same region. rd rd rd rd color morphs of a lake victoria cichlid uh \ bu \  / dbr ;d \ i br bl bl bl dbr “a1 1 black’‘ d br ye’ db: 3 fig. 1. nuptial coloration of morphs distinguished within the huplochromis nyererei complex. males left, females right. unpaired fins of females are light to dark brown unless indicated otherwise. bl = black, bu = blue, dbr = dark brown, dbu = dark blue, gr = green, ibr = light brown, 01 = orange lappets, or = orange, rd = red, wh = white, ye = yellow. the null hypothesis was that there was no difference in courtship interaction between individuals of the same and individuals of different morphs (wilcoxon signed-ranks test and fisher’s exact probability test). calculations were done using the statgraphics program package. all experiments were conducted under fluorescent aquarium (light color: white). illumination results the phenotypes six distinct phenotypes were found that differ in male nuptial coloration, female coloration (fig. 1) and the number of vertical bars on the flanks (table 1). henceforth they are referred to as “red”, “zebra”, “big blue”, “red head”, “black and orange” and “all black”. morphological and ecological work on some of them is in progress (bouton in preparation, seehausen in preparation, seehausen & bouton 1997). specimens of each morph and population are stored at the university of leiden and will be depos- ited at the nationaal natuurhistorisch museum leiden. distribution at nine stations only one morph was found. at 15 other stations two readily distinguished morphs co- exist and no intermediate phenotypes were found. at one of these stations a third distinct morph was collected in a single individual. six stations in two regions are inhabited by populations of fishes the majority of which are intermediate in coloration be- tween two elsewhere discrete morphs and exhibit continuous variation (fig. 2,3). 61 seehausen table 1. mean number of vertical bars in six discrete morphs of the h. nyerereicomplex and in two continuously variable populations. morph populations sampled number of bars standard deviation sample size red a 6.5 0.67 62 zeb 5 5.5 0.48 31 bbl 4 6.8 0.58 9 abl 2 - - 4 rhd 1 6.4 0.49 5 bon 1 6.9 0.95 8 lua 1 5.5 0.50 13 mar 1 5.8 0.66 a redfl ~~ 2 6.7 0.53 78 ~~ zebfl 2 5.9 0.50 2a abbreviations: red = “red”, zeb = “zebra”, bbl = “big blue”, abl = “all black”, rhd = “red head”, bon = ““black and orange”. lua = luanso island population, mar = marumbi island population, f l = laboratory-raised f l generation. most morphs are negatively associated with each other in distribution (table 2). according to macro- habitat, the morph complex can be split up into two groups (fig. 2): “red’, “zebra” and “black and or- ange” inhabit predominantly places with a mean rock boulder diameter above 0.9 m and shore slopes steeper than 5”. “big blue”, “red head” and “all black” are restricted to places with smaller boulders 33’ e i and more gentle slopes. within these habitat groups, “red” and “black and orange” have a geographical distribution that is mutually almost exclusive (one “red” individual was collected among 139 “black and orange” at one locality within the range of the latter) and so have the “big blue”/“all black” morph pair and “red head”. these forms appear to be vicar- iants with similar macrohabitat requirements. some populations at the geographical and ecological inter- face between the ranges of “red”/”zebra” and “big blue”/“all black” (fig. 2) are intermediate between “zebra” and “big blue” in coloration. this suggests incomplete reproductive barriers in a hybrid zone, convergence towards an intermediate phenotype, or that the two phenotypes represent geographical vi- cariants of one continuously changing species. nev- speke gulf mwanza gulf r- “red ”zebra” “big blue” ‘red head“ ‘all black‘ ‘black and orange’’ ‘zebra x red” ‘zebra x big blue” 0 5 10km fig. 2. the geographical distribution of the different morphs in the research area. numbers indicate habitat characteristics: 1 = big rock boulders (> 2.5 m diameter), steep slope (>35”); 2 = in- termediate boulder size (0.9-2.5 m diameter) and slope (5-35”); 3 = small rock boulders (<0.9 m diameter), gentle slope ( < 5 o ) ; 2-3 = intermediate boulder size, gentle slope. r = ruti island, m = makobe island, p = python island, l = luanso island. 62 bl 37‘ fig. 3. coloration of populations in the southern mwanza gulf. top: luanso island. bottom: marumbi island. males. bl = black, br = brown, bu = blue, ge = grey, rbr = red-brown, rd = red, ye = yellow, ygr = yellow-green. table 2. associations between the distribution of color rnorphs of the h. nyerereicomplex from lake victoria. abl rhd bon -0.38* -0.51** t0.51” -0.26 -0.28 -0.11 -0.06 zeb bbl t0.60**’ -0.69*** -0.59”* red zeb bbl abl rho associations calculated by the x2 test of joint probability after simpson et al. (1960). abbreviations as in table 1. ***ko.ool, “k0.01, -0.16 t0.22 -0.20 -0.11 -0.06 ‘k0.05; no asterisk: a0.05. ~ table 3. mechanisms of reproductive isolation among color morphs of the h. nyererei complex. zeb ~~ a bbl -~ pm pm? abl pm pm ? rhd bon pm pm pg po pg ? pm pm pm red zeb bbl abl rhd abbreviations for rnorphs as in table 1, a = active morph-assortative mating, pm = passive morph-assortative mating through macrohabitat segregation, pg = passive morph-assortative mating through geographical isolation. ertheless, mutually exclusive occurrence due to geo- graphical isolation and ecological segregation en- sures passive morph-assortative mating in 11 of the possible 15 morph combinations (table 3). there are three cases of regular sympatry: “red” and “ze- bra” are positively associated with each other as are “big blue” and “all black”, and “black and orange” coexists with “zebra” in a part of the latter’s range. “red” and “zebra” are the only morphs with al- most complete geographical and macrohabitat dis- tribution overlap. the abundance ratio between the two differs significantly between different micro- habitats (fisher’s exact probability test, p<o.ooi; fig. 4), suggesting incomplete microhabitat segre- gation. in rocky shore pools and crevices between rocks in shallow water (<2 m depth), “zebra” com- prises 97% of the individuals at makobe island and 68% at python island. in contrast, in deeper waters (>2 m depth) outside of crevices on the rocks, “red” dominates with 100% and 99% respectively for the two islands. at python island, “red” domi- nates also in shallower waters (<2 m depth) outside of crevices, whereas at makobe island, fishes of the h. nyererei complex are hardly caught in this mi- crohabitat, and the only four individuals caught be- longed to “zebra”. the absence of the zebra morph from some places in the northeastern mwanza gulf (fig. 2) coincides with the almost complete ab- sence of holes and crevices between the rocks, ow- ing to large, compact and almost vertically sloping boulders. a total of 2051 individuals of the morphs “red” color morphs of a lake victoria cichlid and “zebra” (1 893 “red” and 158 “zebra”) were col- lected between ruti island in the north and python island in the south. individuals with intermediate coloration were absent apart from one specimen out of 298 (0.3%) from python island. in contrast, the populations south of python island consisted largely of intermediate phenotypes (fig. 3, 5). at shadi, at luanso island and at luanso mainland continuously variable populations were found. variable is the col- oration of those parts of body and fins that differ in coloration between “red” and “zebra”: the spinous part of the dorsal fin, the dorsum and the anterior flanks. since all intermediate types were found, no two groups could be discerned. these fishes were caught predominantly outside of the rocky crevices and no correlations between color and microhabitat distribution could be detected. at the more southern marumbi island, fishes were less variable, generally resembling “zebra” in the blue spinous dorsal, but 87.5% of the males had a reddish dorsum like “red”, though less bright. these fishes were collected in rocky crevices (the microhabitat of “zebra”) as well as on the open rocky slopes in more than 2 m depth (the microhabitat of “red”). color inheritance and mate recognition all individuals of the red morph (10 from the mwanza gulf, 3 from the speke gulf) and the zebra morph (6 each from mwanza and speke gulfs) re- tained their morph specific coloration after being transferred to the laboratory where they lived be- tween one and three years. f1 generations were ob- tained from two pairs “red mwanza gulf’, one pair “red speke gulf ’, three pairs “zebra mwanza gulf’ and two pairs “zebra speke gulf’. all were mono- morphic, resembling the parental morph. the same holds for f2 generations obtained from the f1 of all four groups. since they were raised under identical conditions, this result indicates that the differences in coloration are inherited and that the wild fishes were homozygous. the results of female mate choice experiments are given in table 4. though all males courted each female, most females of both morphs and geograph- ical populations favored males of their own morph. in direct contact experiments, all females that re- sponded to males favored those of their own morph, and without exception females spawned with a male of their own morph. discussion coloration is a reliable criterion for infemng repro- ductive isolation among phenotypes in many but not all situations. most color morphs in the h. nyererei 63 seehausen complex seem to be reproductively isolated. at least three mechanisms contribute to the maintenance of reproductive isolation: geographical isolation, mac- rohabitat segregation and ethological isolation through morph-assortative female mate choice in combination with incomplete microhabitat segrega- tion. however, while the phenotypes “red” and “ze- bra” represent sympatric sibling species at many lo- calities, they are interbreeding morphs at other lo- calities. the data imply gradually increasing sympa- tric diversification along a geographical gradient. on one extreme is a little variable population in which most individuals are intermediate. on the other extreme are populations with two discrete color morphs that mate actively assortative, are ho- mozygous and behave as two biological species with different microhabitat distribution over a large geographical range. between these extremes are continuously polymorphic populations. the data in- dicate a trend of further increasing levels of ecologi- cal segregation (fig. 4) and possibly assortativeness 100 of mate choice (table 4) from python island to the speke gulf. it seems that the status of color morphs as pheno- types of one species or as two biological species is a function of environmental conditions. water trans- parency differs considerably among localities. sec- chi disc readings vary between more than 200 cm at makobe island in the speke gulf and less than 50 cm at marumbi island in the southern mwanza gulf (seehausen, van alphen & witte unpublished). if such differences influence the vision of the fish, they should influence courtship and mate choice too. considering the large-scale environmental changes that are occurring in lake victoria, this would be relevant to conservation. maynard-smith (1966) suggested that polymor- phisms can be a step preceding speciation when connected with 1) selective advantages of each morph in a different niche, 2) some degree of habitat preferences and 3) assortative mating. a number of studies on cichlid fish lend support to this hypothe- 80 - 8 - 60 r l y- 0 i= a> 3 40 20 0 crevices on rocks on rocks 0 - 2 m d . 0 - 2 m d . >2md. (1071) (37) (4) crevices on rocks on rocks 0 - 2 m d . 0 - 2 m d . >2md. (1 27) (1 52) (1 9) fig. 4. proportional morph composition of h. izyererei samples from different microhabitats at makobe island (left) and python is- land (right). black represents the “zebra”, hatched represents the “red” morph. the number of individuals caught is given in parenthe- ses. 64 80 - h 60- > 0 c a, s 2 40- .c 20 - 1 0 marumbi luanso shadi python makobe fig. 5. the percentage of intermediate phenotypes in “red”/ “zebra” populations at five localities, from the southern mwanza gulf (left) to the speke gulf (right). sample sizes are indicated on top of the bars. the differences in sample sizes are due to differences in abundance of h. nyererei at the different stations. sis. however, they either reported incomplete assor- tatively mating color morphs of one species whose potential to speciate was hypothesized (barlow 1983, meyer 1990) or completely isolated species whose status as siblings was inferred from their anatomy while reproductive interaction between them had never been recorded in nature (baylis 1976, holzberg 1978, marsh et al. 1981). the case reported here differs from the others in that pheno- color morphs of a lake victoria cichlid types are interbreeding morphs at some localities and sibling species at other localities. the data are consistent with conditions (2) and (3) in maynard- smith’s model and lend support to the hypothesis that the mechanism suggested may be operational in cichlid fish. nevertheless, no information is avail- able on selective advantages of the two morphs in the two microhabitats, and more work is needed here. the data suggest that intralacustrine speciation occurs in lake victoria. acknowledgments the tanzania fisheries research institute (professor p.o.j. bwathondi), the director of its mwanza center mr. egid f.b. katunzi and my colleagues at the center are thanked for hospi- tality and support. the nyegezi freshwater fisheries training institute and its principal mr. mapunda are thanked for logisti- cal help. i am indebted to mhoja kayeba, ruben enoka, anna samwel terry, masoud ilomo, aloys peter and ali manva for their expertise in the fieldwork. anna furthermore helped with photographing and preservation of fish. radhmina and gonza mbilinyi gave much logistical support and martin brittijn pre- pared fig. 2, 4 and 5. i thank jacque van alphen, frans witte, niels bouton, tom reimchen and uli schliewen for advice on earlier versions of the manuscript. this study was supported by wotro grant no. w84-282, a grant from the german cichlid association (dcg) and, thanks to the effort of l. schadhauser from wild about animals magazine, was subsidized by the tetra and eheim companies. resumen 1. he estudiado la distribuci6n geogrfifica y de macro- y micro- habitats y el reconocimiento de pareja, entre distintas “morfas” de colores en un complejo de cichlidos del lago victoria. la table 4. behavioral interaction among the sympatric color morphs ”red” and “zebra” from two geographical regions (speke gulf and mwanza gulf) in female mate choice experiments. ~~~ ~ speke gulf ~~ ~ mwanza gulf ~- visual contact experiments choosing female: males female choicesltrials mean frequency of female response mean frequency of male courtship choosing female: males female choicesltrials mean frequency of female response mean frequency of male courtship direct contact experiments female choices (spawning)/trials mean frequency of female response mean frequency of male courtship red red 911 2 0.31 0.93 zebra zebra 1011 2 0.42 0.70 zebra 211 2 0.20 0.82 red 211 2 0.21 0.77 conmorphic heteromorphic 414 0.63 0.96 014 0.12 0.50 0 1112 0 011 2 0 014 p 0.07’ 0.04 0.04 p 0.051~ 0.009 0.76 red 711 2 0.13 0.66 zebra 611 0 0.13 0.87 zebra 211 2 0.04 0.70 red 1/10 0.02 0.69 conmorphic heteromorphic 314 0.15 0.49 014 0.00 0.17 0 311 2 0 311 0 0 1 i4 p 0.15’ 0.02 0.33 p 0.10’ 0.02 0.02 p’ 0.02* 0.01 0.15 explanations: 0 =cases of no female response to any male, p= pvalue (* = fisher’s exact probability test, otherwise wilcoxon signed-ranks test), conmorphic = in- teractions among individuals of the same morph, heteromorphic = interactions among individuals of different morphs. * * pvaiues for all conmorphic versus all heteromorphic interactions. 65 seehausen distribuci6n de la mayor parse de las “morfas” son mutuamente excluyentes per0 dos de ellas se solapan extensivamente y difi- eren solamente en 10s requerimientos de microhabitats. las diferencias de coloraci6n entre ellas son heredadas y 10s peces salvajes son homozigoticos pare la coloraci6n. demuestro una selecci6n de pareja hembra positive. 2. los fenotipos intermedios esthn ausentes en la mayor parte del area geogrifica comun, y las dos “morfas” deberian en- tonces considerarse especies distintas. sin embargo, en pobla- ciones ubicadas en 10s extremos del area de distribucibn, 10s fenotipos intermedios con coloraci6n masculina variando con- tinuamente suponen la mayor pate de 10s individuos. 3. sugiero que el estatus de “morfas” de colores como fenotipo de una especie, o como especie biol6gica separada, es una fun- cion de las condiciones ambientales que varian considerable- mente entre localidades. mis datos soportan la hipdtesis de un polimorfismo como paso que precede a la especiaci6n en 10s peces cichlidos. references barlow, g.w. 1983. the benefits of being gold: behavioral con- sequences of polychromatism in the midas cichlid, cichla- soma cirrinellum. environmental biology of fishes 8: 235- 247. baylis, j.r. 1976. a quantitative study of long-term courtship: i. ethological isolation between sympatric populations of the midas cichlid, cichlasoma citrinellum, and the arrow cichlid, c. zaliosum. behaviour 59: 59-69. crapon de caprona, m.d. 1986. the use of fertile hybrids for the study of the accuracy of species recognition in cichlids. annales musee royal de 1’afiique centrale, sciences zoologiques 25 1 : 117-120. crapon de caprona, m.d. & fntzsch, b. 1984. lnterspecific fer- tile hybrids of haplochromine cichlidae (telcostei) and their possible importance for speciation. netherlands journal of zoology 34: 503-538. dominey, w. 1994. effects of sexual selection and life history on speciation: species flocks in african cichlids and hawai- ian drosophila. in: echelle, a.a. & kornfield, i., ed. evolu- tion of fish species flocks. orono: university of maine press, pp. 231-249. goldschmidt, t. & de visser, j. 1990. on the possible role of egg mimics in speciation. acta biotheoretica 38: 125-134. holzberg, s. 1978. a field and laboratory study of the behav- iour and ecology of pseudotropheus zebra (boulenger), an endemic cichlid of lake malawi (pisces; cichlidae). zeitschrift fur zoologische systematik und evolutionsfors- chung 16: 171-187. marsh, a.c., ribbink, a.j. & marsh, b.a. 1981. sibling spe- cies complexes in sympatric populations of petrotilupia tre- wavas (cichlidae, lake malawi). zoological journal of the linnean society 71: 253-264. maynard-smith, j. 1966. sympatric speciation. american natu- ralist 100: 637-650. mcelroy, d.m. & kornfield, i. 1990. sexual selection, repro- ductive behavior, and speciation in the mbuna species flock of lake malawi (pisces: cichlidae). environmental biology of fishes 28: 285-94. mckaye, k.r., kocher, t., reinthal, p. & kornfield, i. 1982. a sympatric sibling species complex of petrotilapia trewavas from lake malawi analysed by enzyme electrophoresis (pi- sces: cichlidae). zoological journal of the linnean society 76: 91-96. mckaye, k.r., kocher, t., reinthal, p., harrison, r. & korn- field, i. 1984. genetic evidence for allopatric and sympatric differentiation among color morphs of a lake malawi cichlid fish. evolution 38: 215-219. meyer, a. 1987. phenotypic plasticity and heterochrony in cichlasorna rnanaguense (pisces, cichlidae) and their impli- cations for speciation in cichlid fishes. evolution (lawrence, kansas) 41: 1357-1369. meyer, a. 1990. ecological and evolutionary aspects of the trophic polymorphism in cichlasoma citrinellum (pisces: cichhdae). biological journal of the linnean society 39: 279-299. milinski, m. & bakker, t.c.m. 1990. female sticklebacks use male coloration in mate choice and hence avoid parasitized males. nature 344: 330-333. ribbink, a.j. 1986. the species concept, sibling species and speciation. annales musee royal de 1’afrique centrale, sci- ences zoologiques 251: 109-116. ribbink, a.j., marsh, b.a., marsh, a.c., ribbink, a.c. & sharp, b.j. 1983. a preliminary survey of the cichlid fishes of rocky habitats in lake malawi. south african journal of zoology 18(3): 149-310. seehausen, 0. 1992. victorian cichlids. 1. introduction to tax- onomy and ecology. the cichlids yearbook 2: 54-59. seehausen. 0. 1994. unrecognized species diversity in a threat- ened environment. patterns of diversity of lake victoria rock cichlids. abstract. viii congress of the european ichthyo- logical union, abstract volume, oviedo: 26. seehausen, 0. 1996. a reconsideration of the ecological com- position of the cichlid species flock in lake victoria before and after the nile perch boom. in: van densen, w., lowe- mcconnell, r. & morris, m.g., ed. lacustrine fish commu- nities in se-asia and africa. dyfed: samara publishing. seehausen, 0. & bouton, n. 1997. the community of rock- dwelling cichlids in lake victoria. bonner zoologische bei- trage (in press). simpson, g.g., roe, a. & lewontin, r.c. 1960. quantitative zoology. new york: harcourt brace jovanovich. van oijen, m.j.p., witte, f. & witte-maas, e.l.m. 1981. an in- troduction to ecological and taxonomic investigations on the haplochromine cichlids from the mwanza gulf of lake vic- toria. netherlands journal of zoology 31: 149-174. witte, f. & witte-maas, e.l.m. 1987. implications for taxon- omy and functional morphology of intraspecific variation in haplochi-omine cichlids of lake victoria. in: witte, f. from form to fishery. phd thesis. leiden: leiden university. witte-maas, e.l.m. & witte, f. 1985. haplochrornis nyererei, a new cichlid fish from lake victoria named in honour of mwalimu julius nyerere, president of tanzania. leiden: brill. 13 pages. 66  