ecology of freshwater fish 1999: 8: 111-113 printed in denmark . all righfs reserved copyright 8 munksgaard 1999 ecology of freshwater fish issn 0906-6691 ecological genetics: introductory note utter fm. ecological genetics: introductory note. ecology of freshwater fish 1999: 8: 11 1-1 13. 0 munksgaard, 1999 abstract - the eight papers resulting from the ecological genetics session of the symposium ecology of stream fish: state of the art and future prospects (luarca, spain, april 1998) describe the use of molecular gen- etic markers to investigate questions of population distinctness, inter- breeding, and adaptation in five salmonid species. widely contrasting eco- logical distinctions described in four species indigenous to western north america [steelhead (rainbow) trout, sockeye salmon, pink salmon and bull trout] reflect past natural and human-induced activities, serving to guide future management and conservation actions through optimizing adaptive opportunities, and preventing genetic losses through localized ex- tinctions. studies of brown_trout contrast widespread introgressions from exogenous hatchery introductions that threaten the integrity of native spanish populations with a reduced threat based on use of indigenous fish in portuguese hatcheries. a 9-year study of natural progeny of two genetically distinct swedish brown_trout populations introduced to a pre- viously trout-free area identifies apparent local adaptations as a model to guide other translocations. f. y. utter school of fisheries, university of washington, seattle, usa key words: ecological genetics; adaptation; salmonid f. m. utter, school of fisheries, univ. of washington, box 357980, seattle 98195, usa accepted for publication april 27, 1999 un resumen en espaiiol se incluye detras del texto principal de este articulo. ecology, the science of ecosystems, includes the virtually infinite relationships among organisms and environments (e.g. smith 1992, fig. 1.1). in- evitably in such a complex field, a tendency will arise for limited interdisciplinary cross-communi- cations resulting in myopic perspectives within spe- cializations. this group of population genetic papers, representing one of six areas of specializa- tion at the symposium ecology of stream fish, moves towards breaking down this barrier in studies of five salmonid species. population genetic studies provide critical eco- logical insights through studying how the evol- utionary processes of mutation, migration, selec- tion and drift interact within and among groups of potentially interbreeding individuals. each of these articles is based on suites of molecular genetic markers. at such marker loci, selection appears to be minimal and mutation can often (but not al- ways) be ignored at the intraspecific level (e.g., see discussions in utter et al. 1993, grant et al. 1999). however as primarily reflections of migration and drift, molecular genetic data yield powerful infor- mation about population distinctness, inter- mingling and interbreeding; and as population di- vergence increases at marker loci, opportunities for adaptive differences accumulate throughout the re- mainder of the genome. from this perspective, these papers are can be placed into three cate- gories; divergent natural histories, effects of hatch- ery releases, and phenotypic variation in a com- mon environment. particularly noteworthy in the first category is the ecological distinctness of native populations of four salmonid species of western north america. the sympatric steelhead populations (nielsen & fountain 1999) occur towards the southeastern ex- treme of anadromous salmonids of the north pa- cific ocean where challenges of drought and high temperatures appear to be implicated in the dis- tinct temporal migration and genetic isolation of the summer and winter runs. the life history of riverine sockeye salmon (gustafson & winans 1999) provide ecological exceptions to this species’ numerically predominant lake-dependent popula- tions, where relationships support a compelling hypothesis that riverine fish are the invaders of newly vacated habitats and thus the key to species’ 111 utter evolutionary future. despite somewhat indistinct (i.e., shallow) population structuring, pink salmon in streams of prince william sound, alaska (seeb et al. 1999) maintain distinct upstream and inter- tidal populations, with extensive hatchery oper- ations representing a potential threat to genetic in- tegrity of both groups. concluding that declining bull trout populations of lightning creek are not maintained by healthier populations that also mi- grate to lake pend oreille from adjacent streams (spruell et al. 1999) portends their imminent ex- tinction in the absence of remedial actions. three of the four remaining articles that deal with brown_trout contrast interactions of iberian hatchery and native populations. a fixed difference at the ldh-c* locus that distinguishes spanish hatchery fish of northern european origins from native populations (cagigas et al. 1999, garcia- marin et al. 1999) has proven particularly useful for tracing the fate of hatchery introductions. re- duced survival and reproduction of hatchery fish have retarded deterioration of native trout popula- tions. nevertheless, indigenous populations are be- coming increasingly eroded by hatchery genes. in heavily stocked areas, hatchery introgression is widespread even in unplanted streams (cagigas et al. 1999), though diminished in planted areas that are intensively fished (garcia-marin et al. 1999). although native trout populations of northern portugal share a common ancestry with adjacent spanish populations (antunes et al. 1999), portug- uese hatchery trout of this region have indigenous origins and therefore are less threatening to wild native fish. the final category is a “common garden” study of two genetically distinguishable brown_trout populations introduced to a previously trout free area (palm & ryman 1999) where phenotypic dif- ferences of naturally produced progeny were exam- ined over a nine year interval. phenotypic differ- ences, including maturation schedules and mi- gratory and reproductive behavior that were consistent with local adaptations, provide valuable guidelines for consideration of managers prior to attempted translocations of different conspecific lineages. each of these studies demonstrates both the power of molecular genetic markers for examining interactions among distinct conspecific groupings, as well as their limitations for directly probing the adaptive relationships between specific genes and environmental variables. nevertheless, as demon- strated here, these markers permit strong adaptive inferences by distinguishing diverged genomes. consequently, these studies add to a continually growing understanding of the relationships be- tween individual populations and their environ- 112 ments as a stimulus for further study, and a guide towards more appropriate management. in combi- nation, they exemplify the diverse applications of molecular genetic data towards gaining deeper in- sights into ecology of stream fish. i gratefully acknowledge the contributions of many people in this collection of articles. in ad- dition to the obvious efforts of each author, each article benefited from the comments of two or more peer reviewers. dr. jennifer nielsen secured reviews and provided editorial guidance for the two papers that i coauthored. the symposium would never have occurred and these papers would not exist without the vision, energy, patience and perseverence of dr. javier lobon-cervia. resumen 1. los ocho trabajos presentados en la sesion de ecologia ge- netica en el simposium “ecology of stream fish: state of the art and future prospect” (luarca, asturias 1998) describen la utilization de rnarcadores gentticos para investigar cuestiones sobre diferenciacibn de poblaciones, entrecruzamiento y adap- tacion en cinco especies de salrnonidos. 2. las amplias diferencias ecolbgicas que se describen en cuatro de estas especies nativas de norteamerica (oncorhynchus_mykiss, 0. nerku, 0. gorbuscha y sulvelinus conjuentusj reflejan actuaciones pasadas, tanto naturales como inducidas por el hombre, que sirven de guia para futuras acciones de gestion y conservacion, optimizando oportunidades adaptativas y previ- niendo perdidas genkticas prndncidac pnr ertinciones lecales. 3. por su parte, 10s estudios sobre sulmo trutta, enfrentan una introgresibn profunda, resultado de repoblaciones con indivi- duos de piscifactoria, que amenaza la integridad de las pobla- ciones nativas espafiolas, frente a una rnenor amenaza basada en el us0 de poblaciones nativas en las repoblaciones realizadas en portugal. 4. por ultimo, 10s resultados de un estudio realizado en suecia, durante nueve aiios, sobre 10s descendientes de dos poblaciones gentticamente distintas, de salmo_trutta, introducidas en una zona previamente vaciada de truchas, reflejaron adaptaciones locales que se proponen como un modelo a seguir para otras repoblaciones. references antunes, a., alexandrino, p. & ferrand, n. 1999. genetic cha- racterization of portuguese brown_trout (sulmo trutta l.) and comparison with other european populations. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 19&200. cagigas, m.e., vazquez, e., blanco, g. & sanchez, j. a. 1999. genetic effects of introduced hatchery stocks on indigenous brown_trout ( s a h o trutta l.) populations in spain. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 141-150. garcia-marin, j.l., sanz, n. & pla, c. 1999. erosion of the native genetic resources of brown_trout in spain. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 151-158. grant, w.s., garcia-marin, j.l. & utter, em. 1999. defining population boundaries for fishery management. in: mustaf- fa, s., ed. genetics in sustainable fisheries management. ox- ford: blackwell scientific publications ltd., pp 27-71, gustafson, r.g. & winans, g.a. 1999. distribution and popu- lation genetic structure of river- and sea-type sockeye salmon ecological genetics: introductory note nielsen, j.l. & fountain, m.c. 1999. microsatellite diversity in in western north america. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 181-194. sympatric reproductive ecotypes of pacific steelhead (on- corhynchus mykiss) from the middle fork eel river, califor- nia. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 159-168. palm, s. & ryman, n. 1999. genetic basis of phenotypic diffe- rences between transplanted stocks of brown_trout. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 169-180. seeb, j.e., habicht, c., templin, w.d., seeb, l.w., shaklee, j.b. & utter, em. 1999. allozyme and mitochondria1 dna variation describe ecologically important genetic structure of even-year pink salmon inhabiting prince william sound, alaska. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 122-140. harper collins. 617 pp. smith, r.l. 1992. elements of ecology. 3rd edn. new york: spruell, i?, rieman, b.e., knudsen, k.l., utter, em. & allen- dorf, f.w. genetic population structure within streams: mi- crosatellite analysis of bull trout populations. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 114-121. utter, em., seeb, j.e., seeb, l.w 1993. complementary uses of ecological and biochemical genetic data in identifying and conserving salmon populations. fisheries research 18: 59- 76. 113  