ecology of freshwater fish 1999: 8: 109-110 printed in denmark . all rights reserved copyright 6 munksgaard 1999 ecoidgy of freshwater fish issn 09066691 ecology of stream fish: state of the art and future prospects, luarca (valdes, asturias), spain, 13-17 april 1998. an introductory note javier lob6n-cervih' & erik mortensen2 'department of evolutionary ecology, national museum of natural sciences, g.s.i.c., c/. josc gutierrez abascal, 2, e-28006 madrid, spain, 20rns0vej 15, dk-8600 silkeborg, denmark streams (whatever definition applies) comprise complex nets of running waters that, in all zoogeo- graphical regions, are inhabited by more than 9000 fish species exhibiting a bewildering diversity of biological adaptations. the adaptive strategies of the stream fish populations and the role fish play in these ecosystems have attracted the interest of researchers since the very early stages of the eco- logical and life history theories (fisher 1930, cole 1954, margalef 1974). nevertheless, recent decades have witnessed an explosion in the amount of in- formation gathered. well-established lines of in- quiry and theoretical and technical development (matthews & heins 1987; wotton 1990; matthews 1998), including the refinement of methods to quantify specific parameters in aquatic environ- ments, have resulted in the tackling of new issues and application of novel approaches. on the other hand, pollution and water regula- tion caused by industrial and agricultural practices and the transfer of fishes outside their native distri- butional ranges have encouraged the scientific com- munity and other social forces to explore alternative management options to mitigate the impact of hu- man activities on the streams and their fish popula- tions and to design strategies for maintaining biodi- versity (szaro & johnston 1996). these ecologically oriented issues required interdisciplinary research not only to provide critical insight into the dynamic processes of the streams but also to develop testable models for the management of these aquatic eco- systems of complex functioning (cummins 1974) and for the preservation of genomes, populations, species and ecosystems. within this interdisciplinary perspective, the luarca symposium attempted to review, evaluate and synthesize the existing knowledge on the ecol- ogy of stream fish and to identify gaps and promis- ing avenues of future research. to meet these goals, the symposium was divided into six sections: mechanistic aspects of habitat selection (4), landscape approaches of stream fish ecology (1 l), ecological genetics (1 l), life-history evolu- tion (8), stream management, conservation and endangered species (10) and behavioral ecology (4). as a whole, 52 communications (numbers in brackets above) tackled topics that represent the specific interest of the presenters. detailed, positive discussions on these topics helpfully assisted the chairpersons in identifying key factors and in drawing major conclusions for each session. se- lected papers presented at the meeting will be pub- lished in ecology of freshwater fish. the issues containing these articles will be forwarded by introductory notes authored by the chairper- sons. these introductory notes intend to summar- ize the conclusions of the meeting as guidelines for future research. the conveners of the symposium and the editors of the journal expect the readers to find the lessons of these papers rewarding and relevant for the fu- ture research and management of stream fish. acknourled#ments thanks to all participants and authors who offered their contri- butions to the meeting and to the compilation of the forth- coming issues of ecology of freshwater fish. special grati- tude is due to a. m. correas, e utter, j. a. baker, l? a. rin- con, b. elvira, r. wootton, g. grossman and n. hughes for their efforts in facilitating the meeting and acting as assistant editors. financial support by the asturian foundation for the development of science & technology (ficyt), the spanish ministry of education & sciences and the facilities provided by the municipality of valdts are warmly acknowledged. references cole, l. 1954. the population consequences of life history phenomena. quarterly review of biology 29: 103-137. cummins, k.w. 1974. structure and function of stream eco- system. bioscience 24: 63 1-641, mattews, w. & heins, d. 1987. community and evolutionary ecology of north american stream fishes. norman: univer- sity of oklahoma press. szaro, r.c. & johnston, d.w., ed. 1996. biodiversity in man- aged landscapes. theory and practice. oxford: oxford uni- versity press. wootton, r.j. 1990. the ecology of teleost fishes. fish & fish- eries series, no. 1. london: chapman & hall. fisher, r.a. 1930. the genetical theory of natural selection. oxford: oxford university press. margalef, r. 1974. ecologia. barcelona: omega edt. mattews, w. 1998. patterns in freshwater fish ecology. new york: chapman & hall. 110  