ecology of freshuuter fish 1997: 6: 190-195 printcd in denmark . an rights reserved copyright 0 munksgaard 1997 ecology of freshwater fish issn 0906-6691 behavioral interactioi (oncorhynchus_kisutch) and chinook salmon (oncorhynchus shawytscha) and prey fish species teen coho s bet7 savitz j, bardygula-nonn l. behavioral interactions between coho (oncorhynchus_kisutch) and chinook salmon (oncorhynchus shawytscha) and prey fish species. ecology of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 190-195. 0 munksgaard, 1997 abstract - the predator-prey behavioral interactions between two salmon species, coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) and chinook salmon (on- corhynchus tshauytscha), and their prey species were examined under lab- oratory conditions. these behaviors were studied to determine the bases for prey selection by salmon in lake michigan and ultimately facilitate predictions on shifts or changes in salmon diets. chinook and coho salmon captured all prey items in the open water portion of the aquarium, and they had similar attack behaviors. average attack swimming speeds varied from 2.6 to 3.6 m i s , and average escape swimming speeds varied from 2.6 to 2.9 d s . there were no significant differences in attack swimming speeds and escape swimming speeds. there was a significant difference in median reactive distances between the prey captured and those that es- caped. there was no reactive distance (0.00 m) for 96% and 98% of the successfully captured prey by chinook and coho salmon, respectively. only 4% and 10% of the unsuccessful attacks by chinook and coho salmon, respectively, had no reactive distance (0.00 m). salmon would repeatedly attack a school and capture individuals separated from the school. ale- wives, bloaters and fathead minnows were easy prey because they re- mained in the open water portion of the aquarium and stayed in schools until only a few individuals remained. the schooling behavior of spottail shiners and emerald shiners was an effective anti-predation tactic against salmon attacks. after some experience with yellow perch, salmon were re- luctant to attack them and would often break off attacks on them. when coho salmon were presented with different proportions of bloaters and yellow perch, they significantly attacked and captured bloaters in prefer- ence to yellow perch. j. savitz, 1. bardygula-nonn* biology department, loyola university of chicago, illinois, usa "present address: biology department, calumet college, whiting, indiana, usa key words: chinook salmon; coho salmon; lake michigan; predation jan savitz, biology department, loyola university of chicago, 6525 n. sheridan road, chicago, il 60626, usa accepted for publication april 10, 1997 un resumen en espaiiol se incluye detriis del texto principal de este articulo. during the 196os, several species of salmonids, in- cluding coho (oncorhynchus_kisutch walbaum) and chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha walbaum), were stocked in lake michigan with the hope of controlling alewives (alosu pseudohar- engus wilson), which had invaded the lake (lawrie 1970; stewart et al. 1981). a large sport fishery for salmonids developed in lake michigan (talhelm 1988). when the alewife population declined (wells & hatch 1984; jude & tesar 1985), there was concern whether there was sufficient forage for the salmonids (christie 1974). stewart et al. (1981) predicted a shift to alternate prey species which included rainbow smelt, (osmerus mordux mitch- ill), yellow perch (percajavescens mitchill) and the bloater (coregonus_hoyi gill). prey selection is ultimately a consequence of predator-prey behavioral interactions, and these 190 interactions might be used as a basis for under- standing prey selection by salmon in lake michi- gan. studies on foraging behavior among fish have increased our understanding of some aspects of prey selection (werner & hall 1974; o’brien et al. 1976; webb 1982; janssen 1982), and this is par- ticularly true for prey selection by piscivorous fishes (feder & lauder 1986; major 1978; webb & skadsen 1980; webb 1982; webb 1986). we exam- ined some behaviors that might be important in prey selection by chinook and coho salmon. prey reactive distances, prey escape swimming speeds and salmon attack swimming speeds were meas- ured for various prey species with each salmon spe- cies. based on an examination of these quantitative behaviors and other qualitative ones, coho salmon were presented with different proportions of two alternative prey species, yellow perch and bloaters, in order to test the hypothesis that yellow perch was not a preferred species by coho salmon. methods the studies were conducted at the john g. shedd aquarium in chicago, illinois. prey species were obtained by seining in lake michigan, from the john g. shedd aquarium, max mcgraw wildlife foundation, university of wisconsin-milwaukee, and local bait shops. the prey species were alewiv- es, yellow perch, rainbow smelt, bloaters, fathead minnows (pimephales promelas rafinesque), spot- tail shiners (notropis hudsonius clinton) and emer- ald shiners (notropis atherinoides rafinesque). chinook salmon m d coho salmon were reared at the jake wolff memorial fish hatchery and main- tained at the john g. shedd aquarium. prior to this study, they were fed either trout chow or thaw- ed smelt and krill. fish were studied in a rectangular cement aquar- ium which contained approximately 24,000 liters of water (4 mx3 mx2 m); this aquarium is re- ferred to as the experimental aquarium. prey spe- cies and predators were maintained and acclimated in separate 1400 liters (2 mx1.2 m x l m) cement aquaria. the color of the walls and bottom of all aquaria was gray. a large cooling coil placed slightly off center on one of the small walls (width) maintained temperatures at 15°c in each of the aquaria. there was space beneath the cooling coil. the water for all of the aquaria was continuously aerated and filtered. a video camera was mounted 2 m above the water level of the experimental aquarium. the video camera was a panasonic wv-3240 8af with a wide-angle lens and the video recorder, tmk model 2055. the entire area of the experimental coho and chinook salmon aquaria could be viewed through the lens, and there was virtually no distortion over most of the area where interactions occurred. the bottom of the experimental aquarium received between 170 and 200 lx from natural sunlight and artificial lighting. a false bottom was placed into the experi- mental aquarium. it was constructed of polyethy- lene tubing and sheathed with white plastic sec- tioned by black tape into grids. each side of the grid had a length of 0.5 m. salmon were allowed to acclimate to the experi- mental aquarium for 2-3 days before prey were in- troduced. the size of the salmonids varied from 29.5 to 32 cm. two or three members of the same species were released into the aquarium. windell (1966) found that when two or more predators were released in the same aquarium, their interest in foraging occurred sooner. seven chinook salmon and four coho salmon were used in the study. salmon were believed to be acclimated to the conditions of the aquarium when they actively foraged on fathead minnows. prey species were allowed to acclimate to the ex- perimental aquarium by either placing them in a large floating net or a hand-held net before re- leasing them. in the latter approach, prey were re- leased when they formed schools or the exhibited similar swimming behaviors displayed in the hold- ing aquaria. the prey species introduced and the number of prey was random for measurements of reactive distance, attack swimming speeds, and es- cape swimming speeds. the number of prey intro- duced into the experimental aquarium varied from one individual to two dozen of a single prey spe- cies. in experiments involving simultaneous intro- ductions of two species, 15 or 20 prey were intro- duced. with 20 prey items the following pro- portions of prey species were introduced: 3 : 1, 1 : 1, and 1 : 3. with 15 prey items, the proportions were 1 : 2 and 2 : 1. sizes of prey ranged from 4 to 5 cm in total length. the number and proportion used for a particular trial was randomly determined. observers noted whether a prey item was actu- ally captured. a panasonic recorder (nv-8950) capable of freeze frame and frame-by-frame ad- vance was used in calculating salmon attack swim- ming speeds, prey reactive distances and prey es- cape swimming speeds from the video recordings. prey reactive distance was the distance between the attacking salmonid and the first reaction, i.e., movement, by the prey in response to that attack. swimming speeds were calculated by determining the distance a fish moved between two frames of a video recording; there were 30 framedsecond. measurements of swimming speeds and reactive distances were measured on the interactions that were primarily in the horizontal plane. 191 savitz & bardygula-nonn analyses of variance were used to test for sig- nificant differences in attack and escape swimming speeds (sokal & rohlf 1969), and the mann-whit- ney test was used to determine significance of reac- tive distances (daniel 1983). in the experiments in- volving two species, a chi-square test of manly et al. (1972) designed to test the null hypothesis that all individual prey items are equally vulnerable during an experiment where items are removed but not replaced during the course of the experiment. results qualitative aspects of salmon foraging behavior there was no obvious difference in attack behav- iors by chinook and coho salmon, and they dis- played two general types of attack behavior. the salmon would accelerate rapidly and catch a prey item before it had a response to the attack. the salmon could attain maximum velocity in one frame (1/30 s) of the video recording. this type of attack behavior was common for alewives, bloaters and fathead minnows. with the other attack be- havior the salmon approached the prey slowly and when it was close to the prey attack it quickly. this type of behavior was commonly utilized in attacks on shiners and yellow perch. neither salmon species was effective in captur- ing prey when they schooled. chinook salmon only caught two schooling individuals, one at the front of the school and one at the rear. coho salmon only caught one schooling individual, and it was at rear of the ;c:iool. 3: 'h speciej would attack a school of fish causing several individuals to become separated from it. while they attacked the school, the focus of their attack changed from one prey item to another. once a prey was separ- ated from the school, the salmon would attack it if the prey remained in the open water portion of the experimental aquarium. in fact, they only attempted to capture prey in the open water por- tion of the experimental aquarium; there were no attempts to trap or catch prey along walls of the aquarium or in the vicinity of the cooling coils. qualitative aspects of prey behavior alewives generally formed schools and remained in the open water portion of the aquarium. under salmon attack, alewives would continue to form schools until there were fewer than five individuals in the experimental aquarium. even then, they might have been able to remain in a school except they were almost constantly under attack. if there were only one or two alewives in the aquarium, then the individuals stayed close to the surface and swam close to the wall. 192 bloaters formed schools or occurred as solitary individuals. when attacked, schools would break apart and individuals either swam towards the water surface, close to the bottom, or along the walls. bloaters usually stayed in the lower portion of the water column. fathead minnows formed schools, but individ- uals were easily separated from the schools after the salmon made at least one attack on a school. fathead minnows were darkly pigmented which might have allowed easy detection and an accurate determination of the point of attack. when at- tacked, they did not appear to turn quickly. they did stay close to the bottom or close to other physical structures, but they were often found in the open water as well. their only successful mech- anism for avoiding predation was to stay close to the walls of the aquarium. rainbow smelt also occurred in schools. they were very difficult to capture because they stayed at the very top of the water column and rarely moved. their silvery ventral surface probably made them difficult to see. often, a smelt remained in the experimental aquarium for several days be- fore it was attacked. it appeared as if a salmon would finally notice the smelt and then quickly at- tack it. the smelt were usually captured. once at- tacked, smelt made no attempt to avoid predation. there were no quantitative data on swimming speeds or reactive distances with this species be- cause all salmon attacks were primarily in the ver- tical plane and measurements of swimming speeds, and reactive dic 'ance could not be accurately de- termined. emerald shiners were usually in schools and close to the water surface. their silvery ventral sur- face probably made them difficult to detect or to accurately determine a point of attack. they ex- hibited fast escape swimming speeds and turned sharply when attacked. salmon seldom attacked them and when they did they missed. in most cases, salmon were moving towards the surface when attacking the emerald shiners. none of the emerald shiners were ever caught; they were re- moved from the experimental aquarium by hand nets after they had been in the aquarium for a week or more. spottail shiners were similar to emerald shiners in that they formed a school which stayed or re- mained close to the water surface. spottail shiners also stayed close to walls of the aquarium. some- times the school stopped and formed a cluster with each individual positioned head outward, and each individual was pointed in a different direction in a 3-dimensional space. spottail shiners were also very fast, turned quickly, and were difficult to cap- ture. salmon seldom attacked spottail shiners. table 1. ranges of maximum attack swimming speeds of chinook salmon and reactive distances and maximum escape swimming speeds of prey species in the open water portion of the experimental aquarium. prey species trials alewives bloaters fathead minnows spottail shiners yellow perch 14 83 22 2 13 range of reactive distances m 0.00-0.18 0.00-0.02 0.00-0.17 0.00-0.11 0.00-0.16 escape velocity meantsd m . s-' 1.451.2 2.221.0 2.121.6 2.520.1 2.321.3 attack velocity mean5sd m . s-' 2.922.0 2.620.8 2.922.1 2.820.2 3.020.6 table 2. ranges of maximum attack swimming speeds of coho salmon and reactive distances and maximum escape swimming speeds of prey species in the open water portion of the experimental aquarium. prey species trials alewives bloaters fathead minnows spottail shiners yellow perch 3 169 22 3 22 range of reactive distances m 0.00 0.00-0.19 0.004.18 0.004.05 0.00-0.24 escape velocity mean+sd m . s-' 2.1 20.4 2.020.7 2.321.8 2.9-cl.5 2.921.9 attack velocity mean+sd m . s-' 2.820.1 2.620.5 3.022.0 3.6+1.0 3.021.9 when they did attack, they were usually unsuc- cessful. yellow perch formed schools but also fre- quently occurred as solitary individuals. they swam close to walls of the aquarium and the cooling coil or stayed in the open water and sometimes simply maintained themselves as stationary individuals in the middle of the open water portion. if they were swimming in the open water and were attacked they would often change locations within the experimental aquar- ium to avoid predation. they had fast escape swimming speeds and turned quickly when at- tacked. after some experience with yellow perch, salmon would rarely attack them. sometimes, in the midst of an attack, they would suddenly break off the attack even when the yellow perch made no movement or attempt to escape. this response by the salmon to yellow perch was not evident with any other prey species. reactive distances, attack and escape swimming speeds prey reactive distances ranged from 0.00 to 0.18 m for chinook salmon (table 1) and 0.00 to 0.24 m for coho salmon (table 2). the mann-whitney test (daniel 1983) indicated a significant difference (p<o.ool) regardless of predator species in reactive coho and chinook salmon distances of prey which were captured and those that escaped. ninety-six percent (96%) of the suc- cessful captures by chinook salmon and 98% suc- cessful captures of coho salmon occurred when there was no reactive distance by the prey. in con- trast, only 4?40 of the unsuccessful captures by chin- ook salmon and 10% of the unsuccessful captures by coho salmon occurred when there was no reac- tive distance. average escape swimming speeds were 2.0 to 2.9 m/s (tables 1, 2). the single classification analysis of variance indicated there was no significant dif- ference in escape speeds among prey species pur- sued by chinook salmon (f=1.33, p>0.05) or coho salmon (f=2.36, p>0.05). alewives were not included in the test for coho salmon because only two escape speeds were measured, and spottail shiners were eliminated from the test of escape swimming speeds from chinook salmon since only three measurements were available and the vari- ance of the escape swimming speeds was much smaller than that for the other prey species. prey escape swimming speeds were not significantly dif- ferent between chinook and coho salmon (1;=0.30, p>0.05). average salmon attack swimming speeds were 2.6 to 3.6 m/s (tables 1, 2). the single classification analysis of variance test indicated that chinook salmon and coho salmon attack swimming speeds were not significantly different among prey species; they were f=0.06, p>0.05 and f=0.28, p>0.05, respectively. even though, the average attack swimming speeds are slightly higher than the aver- age escape speeds, there was no significant differ- ence (1;=0.09, pb0.05) between attack swimming speeds and escape swimming speeds. table 3. coho salmon foraging attempts at different proportions of bloaters and yellow perch. statistical analyses were performed on attempts and captu- res until either one species was eliminated or was located at a refuge and not available to the predators. 'f<0.05; *'f<o.ol. attempts captures proportions trials b yp b yp 15yp:5b 1oyp:lob 1oyp:sb 5yp:lob 5yp:15b 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 6 9 11 10 7 9 5 6 5 5 11 12 19 1 0 2 * ' * 2 1 0 1 2 2 0 0 0 1 ** * ** * * * ** " * ns ns   4 4 5 5 6 8 5 5 3 4 5 12 14 1 1 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 * * '* **   * *  ns ns 193 savitz & bardygula-nonn two species introductions - yellow perch and bloaters on the basis of the qualitative observations be- tween the salmon species and yellow perch, we con- cluded that yellow perch were not a preferred prey species of the salmon. we tested this hypothesis by presenting coho salmon with different proportions of bloaters and yellow perch. in nearly all of the chi-square tests of manly et al. (1972), coho salmon made fewer attempts to capture yellow perch when compared to bloaters (table 3), and, in some trials, no attempts were made to capture yellow perch (table 3). coho salmon would seldom attack yellow perch until all of the bloaters were consumed or had escaped to a refuge along the walls of the aquarium or the top of the water column. coho salmon significantly (p<0.05) captured more bloaters when compared to yellow perch regardless of the ratio of yellow perch and bloaters (table 3). significantly (p<0.05) discussion webb & skadsen (1980) studied the attack behav- ior of tiger muskies (esox lucius x e. masquinongy) on fathead minnows. the minnows rarely tried to escape and the success of the tiger musky de- pended on the accuracy of its attack on the prey. with salmon, in nearly all of the successful cap- tures, the prey had no reactive distance. because most successful captures occurred before the prey could react to the salmon’s attack, anything that increased reactive distance would be helpful for prey escape. schooling was a very important anti- predator trait. the schools of spottail and emerald shiners succeeded in virtually eliminating attacks on the prey. the schools did move around the tank very quickly and when spottail shiner schools were stationary, individuals oriented themselves in such a manner so that every direction in a three dimen- sional space had an observer. schools of alewives, bloaters, or fathead minnows were not as success- ful since the salmon would attack and separate a few individuals from the school. predation was also apparently influenced by the prey’s morphology. yellow perch have sturdy spines on the their fins. the reluctance salmon ex- hibited in attacking yellow perch in this study might have occurred because yellow perch were dif- ficult to swallow or there was an increase in poten- tial injury to salmon when attempting to swallow yellow perch. undoubtedly the ratio of the sizes of yellow perch and salmon are important since larger salmon probably could utilize much more effec- tively the sizes of yellow perch in this study. sav- itz & janssen (1982) showed that largemouth bass (micropterus salmoides) sizes were important in de- 194 termining the sizes of bluegills (lepomis macro- chirus) and green sunfish (lepomis cyanellus) that could be swallowed by largemouth bass. one of the purposes of this project was to deter- mine why salmon were not switching prey in lake michigan when alewives decreased in abundance. it is clear that they can utilize all of these prey species but some species might be to difficult to see, to attack successfully, or to swallow. some spe- cies might not be utilized because they usually oc- cur at a different depth in the water column then the salmon. spottail shiners and emerald shiners will not be utilized because of their schooling be- havior, and, during the summer months, they are usually found close to the shoreline in warmer waters where salmon are not found (savitz et al. 1991). rainbow smelt and bloaters are easily cap- tured by salmon and could serve as an alternate prey species. smelt generally do not have the same vertical distribution as salmon or alewives in lake michigan (crowder et al. 1981). during the day, smelt were in colder and deeper waters, but at night, they migrated upward and were found in warmer water and were higher in the water column than most alewives (brandt et al. 1980). when the smelt are higher in the water column they might avoid detection by salmon as they did under lab- oratory conditions. smelt might be utilized heavily during the spring and fall months when water tem- peratures are low along the shoreline and smelt and salmon occupy those waters (savitz et al. 1995). bloaters in lake michigan were a bottom- dwelling species while alewives usually occur higher in the water column (crowder & crawford 1984). the alewife was probably the principal for- age because it occurred at similar depths or loca- tions as the salmonids. crowder (1986) pointed out that bloaters were higher in the water column be- fore alewives became so prevalent in lake michi- gan. he believed that the present vertical distri- bution of bloaters and alewives was a result of competition between the two species. if crowder’s (1986) conclusions are correct, when alewife popu- lations are small, bloaters might be able to re-in- vade higher levels in the water column and be available to salmon. 1. con el fin de determinar la seleccion de presas en salmones del lago michigan (usa), experimentalmente, estudiamos in- teracciones en el comportamiento predador-presa entre dos es- pecies de salm6n. oncorhynchus_kisutch y 0. tshawytscha, y sus especies presa. 2. en acuario, tanto 0. kisutch como 0. tshawytscha captura- ron presas en la zona pelagica y ambas mostraron comporta- mientos de ataque similares. no encontramos diferencias signi- ficativas (p<0.05) entre la velocidad de ataque de 10s salmones y la velocidad de huida de sus presas. 3. encontramos diferencias significativas (p<o.ool) en las dis- tancias medias de reacci6n entre las presas capturadas y las que escaparon, mientras que no hubo distancia de reaccibn en el 96% y el 98% de las presas capturadas por 0. kisutch y 0. tshawytscha, respectivamente. 4. los salmones deben atacar de forma constante 10s cardhe- nes y capturar a 10s individuos separados de estos. alosa pseu- doharengus. coregonus_hoyi y pimephales promelas resultaron ser presa facil, puesto que permanecieron en la zona pelagica del acuario y se mantuvieron agrupados hasta que sblo unos pocos individuos quedaban separados del grupo. 5. cuando pusimos c. hoyi y p. flavescens, en diferentes pro- porciones junto con 0. kisutch, este ataco y capturo de forma significativa (p<0.05) mas c. hoyi que p. javescens. 6. posiblemente, una especie presa alternativa para ambos sal- mones podria ser aqudla con un comportamiento en cardumen parecido a1 de a. pseudoharengus y posicion similar en la zona pelagica de la columna de agua en el lago michigan. acknowledgements we thank john janssen for help in acquiring fish for the study and information on video recording techniques. we thank fred binkowski, the max mcgraw wildlife foundation, and the john g. shedd aquarium for supplying fish for the study. in addition, we thank the john g. shedd aquarium for use of their facilities in conducting the study. we also thank marcie tarvid, yolanda benson, sandy arango, kim boncoskey, a1 feldman, alberta simpson and roger klocek for their help during the course of the study.'this project was funded by the illinois-indiana sea grant program. brandt, s.b., magnuson, j.j. & crowder, l.b. 1980. thermal habitat partitioning of fishes in lake michigan. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 37: 1557-1564. christie, w.j. 1974. changes in the fish species composition of the great lakes. journal of the fisheries research board of canada 31: 827-854. crowder, l.b. 1986. ecological and morphological shifts in lake michigan fishes: glimpses of the ghost of competition past. environmental biology of fishes 16: 147-157. crowder, l.b. & crawford, h. 1984. ecological shifts in resour- ce use by bloaters in lake michigan. transactions of the american fisheries society 113: 694-700. crowder, l.b., magnuson, j.j. & brandt, s.b. 1981. comple- mentarity in the use of food and thermal habitat by lake michigan fishes. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 38: 662-668. daniel, w.w. 1983. biostatistics: a foundation for analysis in the health sciences. john wiley & sons, inc. new york. new york usa. feder, m.e. & lauder, g.v. 1986. predator-prey relationships: perspectives and approaches from the study of lower vertebra- tes. chicago: university of chicago press. janssen, j. 1982. comparison of searching behavior for zoo- plankton in an obligate planktivore, blueback herring (alosa coho and chinook salmon aestivalis) and a facultative planktivore, bluegill (lepomis macrochirus). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 39: 1649-1654. jude, d.j. & tesar, ej. 1985. recent changes in the inshore forage fish of lake michigan. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 42: 11541 157. lawrie, a.h. 1970. the sea lamprey in the great lakes. tran- sactions of the american fisheries society 99: 766-775. major, f!e 1978. predator-prey interactions in two schooling fishes, caranx ignobilis and stolephorus purpureus. animal behavior 26: 760-777. manly, b.f., miller, p. & cook, l.m. 1972. analysis of a selecti- ve predator experiment. american naturalist 106: 719- 736. o'brien, w.j., slade, n.a. & vingard, g.l. 1976. apparent size as the determinant of prey selection in bluegill sunfish (lepomis macrochirus). ecology 57: 287-294. savitz, j., bardygula, l.g. & scoma, l. 1991. inshore area sur- veys and species introduction. final report. springfield: illi- nois department of conservation, 73 pp. savitz, j., bardygula-nonn, l.g., simpson, a. & funk, g. 1995. survival of smaller caught chinook, oncorhynchus_tshawytscha (walbaum), and coho, oncorhynchus_kisutch (walbaum), salmon from lake michigan and its management implications. fisheries management and ecology 2: 11-16. savitz, j. & janssen, j. 1982. utilization of green sunfish and bluegills by largemouth bass: influence of ingestion time. transactions of the american fisheries society 11 1: 462-464. savitz, j., janssen, j. & warpeha, k. 1984. food habits of lake michigan salmonids in illinois waters. 114th annual meeting of the american fisheries society. cornell university, ithaca, new york. sokal, r.r. & rohlf, ej. 1969. biometry. san francisco: w.h. freeman and company. stewart, d.j., kitchell, j.e & crowder, l.b. 1981. prey fishes and their salmonid predators in lake michigan. transactions of the american fisheries society 110: 751-763. talhelm, d.r. 1988. the international sport fishery of 1980. great lakes fisheries commission special publication 88-4. 70 pp. webb, p.w. 1982. avoidance responses of fathead minnow to strikes by four teleost predators. journal of comparative physiology 147a: 371-378. webb, p.w. 1986. locomotion and predator-prey relationships. in: predator-prey relationships: perspectives and approaches from the study of lower animals. feder, m.e. & lauder, g.v., ed. chicago: university of chicago press, pp. 24-41. webb, pw. & skadsen, j.m. 1980. strike tactics of esux. cana- dian journal of zoology 58: 1462-1469. wells, l. & hatch, r.w. 1984. status of bloater chubs, alewives, smelt, slimy sculpins, deepwater sculpins, and yellow perch in lake michigan, 1983. appendices to lake michigan com- mittee 1984 meeting minutes. great lake fisheries commis- sion, ann arbor pp. 29-36. werner, e.e. & hall, d.j. 1974. optimal foraging and size se- lection of prey by the bluegill sunfish (lepomis macrochirus). ecology 55: 1042-1052. windell, j.t. 1966. rates of digestion in the bluegill sunfish. investigations of indiana lakes & streams 7: 185-214. 195  