eculogy of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 241-244 printed in denmark ’ an rights reserved copyright 0 munksgaard 1997 ecology of freshwater fish short communication efficacy of a vacuuili benthos sai collecting demersal fish eggs from gravel substratum ller for issn 0906-6691 ruetz cr 111, jennings ca. efficacy of a vacuum benthos sampler for collecting demersal fish eggs from gravel substratum. ecology of freshwater fish 1997: 6: 241-244. 0 munksgaard, 1997 abstract -we used two densities of eggs (low=900 eggs/m2; high=5100 eggs/m2) in laboratory experiments to estimate the recovery efficiency of the brown benthos sampler for collecting fish eggs from gravel substrate and to determine if differences (e.g., 5-fold) in egg density in the substratum could be detected with the sampler. the mean egg recovery efficiency of the sampler in the low and high density treatments was 30% (se=8.7) and 35% (se=3.8), respectively. the difference between the treatment means was not significant. therefore, data from the two treatments were pooled and used to estimate the recovery efficiency of the sampler (32.7%, se=4.4). however, we were able to detect a 5 x difference in the number of eggs collected with the sampler between the two treatments. our esti- mate of the recovery efficiency of the sampler for collecting fish eggs was less than those reported for the sampler’s efficiency for collecting benthic macroinvertebrates. the low recovery efficiency of the sampler for col- lecting fish eggs does not lessen the utility of the device. rather, ecologists planning to use the sampler must estimate the recovery efficiency of target fauna, especially if density estimates are to be calculated, because recovery efficiency probably is less than 100”/. c. r. ruetz ill1*, c. a. jennings* 2united states geological survey, biological resources division, ’georgia cooperative fish and wildlife research unit, daniel 8. warnell school of forest resources, university of georgia, athens, usa current address: department of fisheries & wildlife, 200 hodson hall, university of minnesota, 1980 folwell avenue, st. paul, mn 55108-6124, usa key words: vacuum benthos sampler; demersal eggs; gravel cecil a. jennings, georgia cooperative fish and wildlife research unit, daniel 6. warnell school of forest resources, university of georgia, athens ga 30602, usa accepted for publication september 3, 1997 un resumen en espaiiol se incluye detras del texto principal de este articulo. introduction accurate sampling methods for collecting fish eggs from the substratum are needed to identify spawning habitats and to assess reproductive suc- cess of fish stocks. egg traps and suction samplers have been used to sample demersal fish eggs, pre- dominately from deepwater, lacustrine environ- ments (kelso & rutherford 1996). many of these sampling devices are too large and cumbersome (manz 1964; novak & sheets 1969; stauffer 1981) or of limited use in shallow water (e.g., <0.5 m), riverine environments (vogele et al. 1971; gale & thompson 1975; flath and dorr 1984; marsden et al. 1991). for example, the efficiency of a pumping device used by stauffer (1981) for recovering lake_trout sulvelinus numaycush eggs from a simulated spawning habitat (water depth -1.3 m) where known quantities of eggs had been deposited less than 15 cm deep in rubble substrate was estimated at 1 1-1 5%. therefore, the available sampling gears for collecting demersal fish eggs are unsuitable for use in shallow-water, riverine environments. vacuum benthos samplers designed for col- lecting macroinvertebrates from shallow waters may be a suitable alternative to large deepwater pumps, egg traps or diver-operated samplers for collecting demersal fish eggs and larvae from shal- low-water, riverine environments. the recovery ef- ficiencies of vacuum benthos samplers for col- lecting macroinvertebrates range from 70 to 94% (brown et al. 1987; growns 1990), much greater than the 11-1 5% reported for the pumping device designed specifically to collect fish eggs (stauffer 1981). the brown benthos sampler is a portable unit that consists of a pump attached to a stand- pipe and can be operated by one person, making the sampler appealing for use in shallow-water 241 ruetz 81 jennings habitats (brown et al. 1987). to our knowledge, the brown benthos sampler has not been used to col- lect demersal fish eggs. we used a brown benthos sampler to collect de- mersal fish eggs and larvae from gravel substrate in shallow-water habitats (<os m) at known spawning sites of robust redhorse moxostoma ro- busturn in the oconee river, georgia. robust redhorse are an imperiled species that currently is under study to determine reproductive and recruit- ment success. abundances of robust redhorse eggs and larvae in samples collected with the brown benthos sampler from spawning areas seemed low, raising questions about the recovery efficiency of the sampler. knowledge of sampling device ef- ficiency is essential for accurate estimates of total faunal abundance (growns 1990). we hypo- thesized that the low abundances of robust redhor- se eggs observed in field samples were the result of low recovery efficiency by the sampler (i.e., bias) and were not representative of the actual egg abun- dances in the substrate. therefore, we determined the efficiency of the brown benthos sampler to col- lect robust redhorse eggs from gravel substrates and the ability of the sampler to detect a 5-fold difference in demersal fish egg density (i.e., num- ber/m2) from gravel substrate. material and methods we used two densities of eggs (low=900 eggs/m2; high=5 100 eggs/m2) to test the recovery efficiency and the ability of the brown benthos sampler to detect a 5-fold change in egg density from the sub- strate. we preserved about 2010 fertilized robust redhorse eggs in 10% buffered formalin and esti- mated the number of eggs per milliliter (30 eggs/ ml, sd=0.8) by averaging the number of eggs in three 3-ml samples. we filled a 45-liter tank about onethird full with gravel substrate (mean diameter 14 mm; se=0.3). the brown benthos sampler con- sisted of a 12 volt water pump, a filter chamber equipped with a nylon mesh bag, and a standpipe (brown et al. 1987). we forced the standpipe (cross-sectional area 0.1 m2) into the gravel in the tank, added a known quantity of eggs into the standpipe and agitated the gravel to mimic the egg burying behavior of spawning fish. the standpipe was not removed from the substrate during the ex- periment. we operated the brown benthos sampler for 5 min. an operation time of 5 min was chosen because 93% of invertebrates caught in 10 min were captured in the first 5 min of collection (brown et al. 1987). we physically disturbed the gravel in the standpipe to dislodge eggs from the substratum into the water column. the exhaust flow from the pump was recirculated into the 242 the standpipe during operation. upon completion, we removed the collection bag from the filter chamber and preserved the contents of the bag. there were three replicates of the low- and high-density treat- ments, which we conducted in successive order be- ginning with low-density treatment. we counted the number of eggs collected by the sam- pler during each trial. some eggs were damaged by the sampler during collection. we counted egg fragments as the fraction of the egg remaining in the sample (e.g., one half an egg). we determined the egg recovery efficiency for each experimental trial by dividing the number of eggs collected by the known number of eggs avail- able to be sampled. eggs within the standpipe that were not recovered by the sampler during a trial were left in the standpipe. therefore, the total num- ber of eggs available to the sampler in each success- ive trial was greater than the previous trial (i.e., un- collected eggs remained in the standpipe). we as- sessed statistical differences between the two treatments with a t-test. to determine whether egg accumulation in the standpipe was problematic, we tested the relationship between egg recovery ef- ficiency and egg abundance in the standpipe. we used studentized residuals to judge outliers and co- o k ’ ~ distance (d) to appraise influential points in the regression analysis. we evaluated statistical signifi- cance by treating values of p<0.05 as significant. results and discussion the mean recovery efficiency of the brown benthos sampler for the low and high density egg treatment was 30% (se=8.7) and 35% (se=3.8), respectively, and the treatment means were not significantly dif- ferent (t=0.49, df=4, p=0.65). therefore, the re- covery efficiency of the sampler did not vary be- tween egg densities. data from the two treatments were pooled and used to calculate the overall ef- ficiency of the device (32.7%; se=4.4). the total number of eggs collected with the sampler differed between the low and high density treatments, indi- cating that the sampler can detect differences (at least 5-fold) in egg abundance (t= -3.24, df=4, p=0.03 16). egg accumulation in the standpipe during the experiment did not compromise the in- tegrity of the number of eggs in each treatment because the relationship between egg recovery ef- ficiency and egg abundance in the standpipe was not significant (r2=0.12, p =0.51). one of the data points in the regression analysis was an outlier (studentized residual= - 3.5) and was influential (cook’s d=o.9). removal of this point from the analysis decreased the fit of the regression model, which is further evidence of the lack of relation- ship between egg density and recovery efficiency. thus, our results suggest that the brown benthos sampler could be used to compare egg densities in gravel substrate without concern for a density ef- fect on recovery. the results of this laboratory experiment indi- cate that the recovery efficiency of the brown ben- thos sampler for collecting demersal fish eggs in gravel substrate was lower than that reported for benthic macroinvertebrates (brown et al. 1987). fertilized robust redhorse eggs are about 3.3-3.6 mm in diameter, and benthic macroinvertebrates, defined generally as invertebrate organisms retain- ed in sampling net mesh size 2 2 mm (thorp & covich 199 i), are similar in size. however, fish eggs are at the smaller end of the macroinvertebrate size range. stauffer (1981) reported low recovery ef- ficiencies of a pumping device used to sample lake_trout eggs in lakes superior and michigan. lake_trout eggs (5.0-5.6 mm diameter) are larger than robust redhorse eggs (auer 1982). this suggests that factors other than size may influence recovery efficiency of the brown benthos sampler for col- lecting demersal fish eggs. demersal fish eggs are negatively buoyant, which may decrease their re- covery by vacuum samplers. the low recovery efficiency of the brown ben- thos sampler for collecting fish eggs does not indi- cate low utility of the device. rather, investigators planing to use this vacuum samplers to collect fish eggs and larvae should estimate the recovery ef- ficiency of the device for sampling target fauna, especially if density estimates are to be calculated. investigators providing density estimates without reporting the recovery efficiency of the sampling device (dorr et al. 1981) may be assuming incor- rectly that egg recovery efficiency is 100%. recov- ery efficiency estimates allow density estimates to be adjusted and be more accurate and reliable than unadjusted estimates obtained with the same gear. our estimates are based on recovery of eggs buried (<lo cm) in gravel substrate. the effects of egg buoyancy and substrate type on the recovery ef- ficiency of the brown benthos sampler is unclear. thus, comparisons between fish eggs collected in different substrates and between different species should not be made unless the sampler’s recovery efficiency is estimated. recovery efficiency may not be constant with respect to such factors as sub- strate type and species. we recommend the brown benthos sampler for collecting demersal fish eggs; however, quantitative uses of data gathered with vacuum samplers require calibration. 1. con el fin de a: estimar la eficiencia de un muestreador de bentos tipo “brown” para colectar huevos de peces en sustratos a vacuum benthos sampler de grava, y b: determinar la posibilidad de detectar diferencias en las densidades originales de dichos huevos (por ejemplo, a1 nivel de 5x), realizamos experimentos sobre dos densidades dis- tintas de huevos, una baja (900 huevos * m-2) y otra alta (5.100 huevos * m-2). 2. la medias de recoleccibn en 10s tratamientos con baja y alta densidad fueron del 30% (se=8.7) y del 35% (se=3.8), respec- tivamente. no encontramos diferencias significativas entre las medias de estos dos tratamientos (t=0.49, gl=4, p=0.65). por ello, y para poder estimar la eficiencia del muestreador (32.7%, se=4.4), agrupamos 10s datos de 10s dos tratamientos, encon- trando una diferencia a1 nivel de 5x en el numero de huevos colectados. 3. la eficiencia de este muestreador para colectar huevos de peces fuc menor que la demostrada para colectar macroinverte- brados bentonicos. sin embargo, esta menor eficiencia no dis- minuye la utilidad del muestreador. simplemente, aquellos ecb- logos que deseen utilizarlo deberian estimar la eficiencia especi- fica para la fauna bajo estudio, muy especialmente si es necesario cuantificar densidades, ya que la eficiencia de recolec- ci6n es, probablemente, menor del 100%. acknowledgments the georgia power company provided the funding for this re- search. j. evans and many other personnel from the georgia department of natural resources collected robust redhorse broodfish from the oconee river. t. barrett, b. hess, g. looney, j. shelton provided fertilized robust redhorse eggs for this experiment. b. hess and j. martin assisted with the labora- tory experiment. k. bogenrieder, j. chick, j. petty, s. walsh and one anonymous reviewer provided helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article. the georgia cooperative fish and wildlife research unit is sponsored jointly by the united states geological survey, biological resources division, the georgia department of natural resources, the university of georgia, and the wildlife management institute. references auer, n.a. 1982. family salmonidae, trouts. in: auer, n.a. ed. identification of larval fishes of the great lakes basin with emphasis on the lake michigan drainages. special pub- lication 82-83. great lakes fishery commission, ann ar- bor, michigan. brown, a.v., schram, m.d. & brussock, €?i? 1987. a vacuum benthos sampler suitable for diverse habitats. hydrobiologia 153: 241-247. dorr, j.a., 111, o’connor, d.v., foster, n.r. &jude, d.j. 1981. substrate conditions and abundance of lake_trout eggs in a traditional spawning area in southeastern lake michigan. north american journal of fisheries management 1: 165- 172. flath, l.e., & dorr j.a., 111 1984. a portable, diver-operated, underwater pumping device. progressive fish-culturist 46: 219-220. gale, w.f., & thompson, j.d. 1975. a suction sampler for quantitatively sampling benthos on rocky substrates in rivers. transactions of the american fisheries society 104: 398405. growns, 1.0. 1990. efficiency estimates of a stream benthos suction sampler. australian journal of marine and fresh- water research 41: 621426. kelso, w.e. & rutherford, d.a. 1996. collection, preservation, and identification of fish eggs and larvae. in: murphy, b.r. & willis, d.w, ed. fisheries techniques, 2nd ed. bethesda, md: american fisheries society. manz, j.v. 1964. a pumping device used to collect walleye eggs from offshore spawning areas in western lake erie. trans- actions of the american fisheries society 93: 204-206. 243 ruetz & jennings marsden, j.e., krueger, c.c. & hawkins, h.m. 1991. an im- proved trap for passive capture of demersal eggs during spawning: an efficiency comparison with egg nets. north american journal of fisheries management 11: 364-368. novac, re & sheets, wf. 1969. pumping device used to collect thorp, j.h. & covich, a.p., ed. 1991. ecology and classification of north american freshwater invertebrates. new york: aca- demic press. vogele, l.e., boyer, r.l. & heard, w.r. 1971. a portable underwater suction device. progressive fish-culturist 33: 62- 63. smallmouth bass fry. progressive fish-culturist 3: 240. stauffer, t.m. 1981. collecting gear for lake_trout eggs and fry. progressive fish-culturist 43: 186-193. 244  