ecology of freshwater fish 2001: 10: 118–121 printed in denmark ` all rights reserved copyright c munksgaard 2001 issn 0906-6691 short communication nest site selection and aspects of the reproductive biology of the pygmy sculpin (cottus paulus) in coldwater spring, calhoun county, alabama johnston ce. nest site selection and aspects of the reproductive biology of the pygmy sculpin (cottus paulus) in coldwater spring, calhoun county, alabama. ecology of freshwater fish 2001: 10: 118–121. c munksgaard, 2001 c. e. johnston department of fisheries and allied aquacultures, auburn university, auburn, al 36849, usa abstract – imperiled pygmy sculpins are known from only one locality in alabama, usa. one conservation strategy for the species is the creation of another population by introducing the species into a suitable habitat. before such action is considered, however, an understanding of the life history, including reproductive biology and habitat use, of the species must be obtained. in this study, nesting of pygmy sculpins was found to peak in july, although the species has an extended reproductive period. preferred nesting sites had higher ﬂow and shallower water depth than the surrounding habitat. pygmy sculpins readily used artiﬁcial nest sub- strates that were introduced into the spring run, where natural nest sub- strate was uncommon. key words: nest site; reproduction; pygmy sculpin c. e. johnston, department of fisheries and allied aquacultures, auburn university, auburn, alabama, usa; e-mail: cjohnston/acesag.auburn.edu accepted for publication november 8, 2000 un resumen en espan˜ol se incluye detra´s del texto principal de este artı´culo. the pygmy sculpin (cottus paulus) (williams 2000) is known from only one locality, coldwater spring and the associated spring run (coosa river drain- age), in calhoun county, alabama (williams 1968). although this species is protected via listing as a threatened species under the endangered spe- cies act, any organism with such a restricted range is subject to extinction from any number of stoch- astic processes. increasing the distribution of spe- cies with severely restricted ranges by introduction into suitable habitat can be a viable protection measure. before such actions are taken, however, suitable habitat must be identiﬁed. this can only be accomplished if an understanding of the ecol- ogy of the species in question is obtained. speciﬁ- cally, how does the species use its habitat? little is known about the ecology of the pygmy sculpin. like most other sculpins, this species uses cavities for nesting, with males guarding the eggs until hatching (mccaleb 1973). potential competi- tors for nesting cavities include other sculpins and crayﬁshes, which use cavities for shelter. any new 118 habitat would have to include appropriate nest cavities for spawning to be successful. in addition, the role of potential competitors in nest site selec- tion must be assessed. the objectives of this study were to: o assess the use of artiﬁcial nests by pygmy scul- pins as a potential conservation tool; o determine the microhabitat characteristics of natural nest sites; o determine the peak spawning period for this species; o determine time to hatching and clutch success of nests on natural and artiﬁcial nest substrates; and o assess the use of artiﬁcial nests by crayﬁsh. methods the study site, coldwater spring, is an impounded spring in the coosa river drainage. the spring pool is just over an acre and has concrete sides. the spring has an average ﬂow rate of 121 million liters per day, much of which is used by the city of anniston, alabama as a water supply. the remain- ing water ﬂows over a weir into the spring run which ﬂows for 150 m before joining dry creek. the conﬂuence of the spring run with dry creek marks the downstream distributional limit of the pygmy sculpin. the spring pool ranges in depth from 5 cm to over 2 m in the center of the spring. the substrate consists of patches of gravel, cobble and sand. patches of the spring are heavily vegetated, and the plants present include species of myriophyllum, ceratophyllum, fontinalis and fissidens. water depth is deepest in areas with vegetation and water velocity is lowest in these areas. areas with sand substrate are also relatively depth with low water velocity, and areas with gravel/cobble substrate are the shallowest with the highest water velocity. the substrate of the spring run is primarily gravel/ cobble and is relatively shallow with high water velocity. initial surveys indicated that although sculpin are found throughout the spring, they are the least abundant over sand substrates. the study area included both the spring pool and run macrohabitats. to assess nest site selection and use of artiﬁcial nest substrates, four sets of transects were placed in four microhabitats (three in the spring pool, and one in the spring run), each with a different substrate type: sand, submerged mats of vegetation, cobble/gravel (pool) and gravel/cobble (run). each transect set included a control (no added substrate), and two treatment lines where six artiﬁcial nest substrates were placed. the substrates of one treatment were small ﬂower pots cut in half (7 cm (cid:192) 5 cm (cid:192) 3 cm high), and the other treatment had tiles (11 cm (cid:192) 11 cm (cid:192) 1.5 cm high) placed along them. tiles and pots were uniquely numbered. each transect line was three meters long; substrates were placed along these lines at half meter intervals. transects were checked for nesting activity by snorkeling from 5 may to 17 september (27 trips). in addition, the spring pool and run were checked for natural nests by snorkeling and searching for 30 min in each area. natural nests were marked for subsequent monitoring. the number and stage (new, developing, eyed embryos) of clutches and the number of eggs/ clutch were measured for each nest. time to hatch- ing and the number of eggs hatched were measured for 18 nests (43 clutches). the characteristics of 65 natural nests were measured: nest length, width and height; cavity length, width and height; water velocity (measured with a marsh mcbirney ﬂow meter), water depth and substrate type. water velo- city, depth and substrate type were measured at nest site selection by pygmy sculpin three points along each transect line. the carapace length of crayﬁsh inhabiting artiﬁcial nest sub- strates was measured (cambarus sp.). water tem- perature in coldwater spring was 17 (cid:190)c for the duration of the study. statistical tests were run using spss (spss, inc., 1995). duncan’s multiple range test was used as a post-hoc test. results physical aspects of the habitat available to the scul- pins differed. both the water depth and velocity of the four transect groups was signiﬁcantly different (table 1). the microhabitat where vegetation was found is deeper than the other transects (f‰85.9, p‰0.0001). both the sand and cobble/gravel (pool) transects were signiﬁcantly deeper than the gravel/ cobble (run) transect. the gravel/cobble (run) tran- sect had signiﬁcantly faster water velocity than the other (f‰42.7, p‰0.0001), and the cobble/gravel (pool) transect differed from the veg- etation and sand transects. transects the water depth and velocity where natural nests were found was compared to that of transects with similar substrate (cobble/gravel, pool; gravel/ cobble, run). water depth of natural nests was sig- niﬁcantly different from that found in both tran- sects (run: f‰15.7, p‰0.0002; pool: f‰43.1, p‰ 0.0001) (table 1). water velocity did not differ from that found in the run transect (f‰0.94, p‰ 0.333), but was different from that found in the pool (f‰27.4, p‰0.0001). the average height of natural nests was 1.1 cm; width was 3.4 cm and length was 4.3 cm. no nesting activity was observed along transects in the spring pool. no natural nests were observed in the areas with vegetation or sand substrate, but 24 (37%) of the natural nests observed were found in the spring pool in areas with cobble/gravel sub- strate (41 were found in the spring run). the tran- sects with tiles in the run had 153 nests (389 clutch- es); with pots had 12 nests (20 clutches); and the control had 5 nests (12 clutches). spawning peaked in july (fig. 1 and 2), although nests were found table 1. mean (standard deviation in parentheses) water depth and velocity of transects and natural nests. substrate of natural nests was gravel/cobble. transect substrate water depth (cm) water velocity (m/s) vegetation sand cobble/gravel (pool) gravel/cobble (run) natural nests 57.9 (4.6) 47.2 (7.6) 48.0 (12.4) 22.7 (2.4) 37.3 (11.4) 0.01 (0.03) 0.04 (0.02) 0.07 (0.03) 0.19 (0.10) 0.22 (0.15) 119 johnston throughout the course of the study (april–sep- tember). at 17 (cid:190)c the average time to hatching for pygmy sculpin eggs was 19 days. the average number of eggs in new clutches was 25 (sd‰5.5), and the av- erage number of eggs lost per clutch (no. new eggs » no. hatched) was 9.5 (sd‰6.6). there was no signiﬁcant difference in the number of eggs in clutches found in natural and artiﬁcial nests (f‰ 0.07, p‰0.79). there was a signiﬁcant difference in the number of clutches found in natural (mean‰ 4.2, sd‰2.0), tile (mean‰6.3, sd‰4.3) and pot nests (mean‰1.8, p‰0.92) (f‰9.2, p‰0.0002), however. crayﬁsh (cambarus sp.) used both types of arti- ﬁcial substrate (tile and pot) in all transects. cara- pace length differed between the two substrate table 2. mean (standard deviation in parentheses) carapace length (mm) of crayﬁsh using artiﬁcial nest substrates in coldwater spring pool. substrate type vegetation sand cobble/gravel pot tile 18.5 (7.0) 15.8 (5.2) 27.5 (8.7) 23.2 (8.8) 25.3 (6.0) 22.7 (6.5) types (f‰4.3, p‰0.03), with crayﬁsh using tile having a smaller size (tile: mean‰20.7, sd‰7.5, n‰75; pot: mean‰23.4, sd‰8.2, n‰80). for both substrate types, the length of crayﬁsh found in the vegetation was smaller than that for the other tran- sects (tile: f‰10.2, p‰0.0001; pot: f‰10.9, p‰ 0.0001) (table 2). discussion substrate, water depth and water velocity are all important components of the nesting habitat of pygmy sculpins. no nesting activity was observed in vegetation or over sand, both habitats with rela- tively deep, slow-ﬂowing water, even when nest cavities were provided. the most nesting activity, for both the natural and artiﬁcial nests, was in areas of coarse substrate, shallow water depth and relatively swift water velocity. slightly more natural nests were found in the spring run than in the spring pool, and far more artiﬁcial nests were used in the run than in the pool. this could be an arti- fact of available cavities in the two areas with ap- propriate substrate. the area of the spring pool with preferred water depth and velocity has an abundance of cobbles stacked together. nests were sometimes found several layers underneath the sur- face in these areas and were difﬁcult to ﬁnd. due to the abundance of other nest substrates, the scul- pins may have been less likely to use the artiﬁcial substrates. nest substrate is relatively uncommon in the run, where the sculpins readily used the arti- ﬁcial substrates. alternatively, sculpins could pre- fer nesting habitat with shallow, swift water, which was most common in the run, and there were slightly more natural nests in this area. use of natural nest sites could have been com- pounded by the simultaneous addition of artiﬁcial nest substrates into the spring pool and run. al- though transects were placed as far from areas examined for natural nests as possible, it is feasible that the choice of artiﬁcial nest substrates affected the use of natural nests. for example, more males may have had the opportunity to breed by the ad- dition of new nest substrates, and only optimal natural nest sites may have been used. the sculpin preferred the tile substrate over the pots, which could be due to the greater height of fig. 1. average number of new nests detected per sampling trip, may–september fig. 2. average number of clutches in nests detected per sam- pling trip, may–september 120 the pots. nest cavities with greater openings may be more difﬁcult for the sculpin to defend. the tiles, which were readily used, have a similar height to natural nests, and offered a much increased internal surface area. the clutch size of 25 reported here is within the range of 18 to 59 reported by mccaleb (1973) for ova taken from females (data therein reveal a mean of 34). mean clutch size for c. bairdi (ova taken from females) is reported to be much higher than for c. pygmaeus (120, koster 1936; 328, ludwig & norden 1969), but the methods used to obtain these data, as well as that in mccaleb (1973) are different from those in this study and may not be strictly comparable. the incubation period, which is strongly dependent on temperature, is similar to that reported for c. bairdi at similar temperatures (21–28 days at 46–63 (cid:190)f) (bailey 1952). the crayﬁsh inhabiting coldwater spring used the artiﬁcial nest substrates for shelter, and may compete with sculpins for this resource. crayﬁsh used both pots and tiles with equal frequency. interestingly, there was size segregation by habitat, with smaller individuals using the vegetation habitat. pygmy sculpins should readily use artiﬁcial nest substrates if they are of the appropriate height and in areas of swift ﬂow and shallow water depth. the breeding system of this species is complex, and in spite of relatively small clutches of eggs, this spe- cies may have high fecundity since they spawn for a long period of time. for any re-introduction ef- forts, care should be taken to assess populations of potential competitors, such as crayﬁsh. it is also possible that augmentation of populations may cause the population as a whole to exceed the car- rying capacity of the environment. an understand- ing of population variability should be obtained prior supplementary spawning substrates into any habitat. introduction of to the nest site selection by pygmy sculpin que se prolongo´ desde mayo a septiembre. a 17 (cid:190)c los huevos tardaron 19 dias en eclosionar y el taman˜o medio de la puesta fue´ 25. 2. los nidos naturales aparecieron en aguas someras con veloci- dades relativamente ra´pidas y sustratos de grava. ningu´n nido fue´ encontrado en la vegetacio´n o en sustratos de arena. areas que tuvieron bajas velocidades de aguas algo ma´s profundas. 3. sustratos artiﬁciales fueron utilizados como nidos por c. paulus pero preﬁrieron aquellos con entradas mas pequen˜as (preﬁrieron baldosas a pequen˜as macetas). los nidos en baldo- sas tuvieron mas puestas por nido que los nidos en macetas o que los nidos naturales, pero el nu´mero de huevos por puesta no diﬁrio´ entre tipos de nido. 4. los cangrejos utilizaron los nidos artiﬁciales como encondi- te. por ello, una potencial competencia con los cangrejos debe- rı´a ser considerada cuando, como herramienta de conservacio´n, cuando se utilice aumentos de nidos. acknowledgments i would like to thank the anniston waterworks for allowing this research and the staff for their support and cooperation. dan greer assisted with ﬁeld work and bob stiles offered advice and shared data. this project was supported by a grant from the us fish and wildlife service, jackson, ms. references bailey, j.e. 1952. life history and ecology of the sculpin cottus bairdi punctulatus in southwestern montana. copeia 1952: 243–255. koster, w.j. 1936. the life-history and ecology of the sculpins (cottidae) of new york. doctoral thesis. ithaca, new york: cornell university. ludwig, g.m. & norden, c.r. 1969. age, growth and repro- duction of the northern mottled sculpin (cottus bairdi bairdi) in mt. vernon creek, wisconsin. milwaukee public museum occasional papers natural history contribution 34, 67 pp. mccaleb, j.e. 1973. some aspects of the ecology and life his- tory of the pygmy sculpin, cottus pygmaeus williams, a rare spring species of calhoun county, alabama (pisces: cotti- dae). master’s thesis. auburn, alabama: auburn university. williams, j.d. 1968. a new species of sculpin, cottus pygmaeus, from a spring in the alabama river basin. copeia 1968: 334– 342. williams, j.d. 2000. cottus paulus: a replacement name for the pygmy sculpin, cottus pygmaeus williams 1968. copeia 2000: 302. resumen 1. la puesta de cottus paulus tiene un ma´ximo en julio aunque encontramos nidos a lo largo de todo el periodo de estudio 121  