ecology of freshwater fish 2001: 10: 122–126 printed in denmark ` all rights reserved copyright c munksgaard 2001 issn 0906-6691 short communication validation of the otoliths for age determination in barbus sclateri (günth.) escot c, granado-lorencio c. validation of the otoliths for age determi- nation in barbus sclateri (günth.). ecology of freshwater fish 2001: 10: 122–126. c munksgaard, 2001 abstract – otoliths were used to explore the timing of annulus formation in barbus sclateri. lapillus exhibited opaque and translucent zones whose combination was formed once a year. opaque zones appeared formed from july and january, and the translucent ones from february to june. we describe a procedure to assess age by using the number of an- nulii, the condition of the otolith’s edge and the capture date. the use of otoliths for age determination in this cyprinid endemic to the iberian peninsula provides a useful alternative to the traditional methods of scale reading. c. escot1, c. granado-lorencio2 1aquatic ecology station, emasesa, sevilla, 2department of plant biology and ecology, faculty of biology, university of sevilla, spain key words: otolith; age determination; barbus sclateri c. granado-lorencio, department of plant biology and ecology, faculty of biology, university of sevilla, apdo. 1095, sevilla e-41080, spain; e-mail: granado/cica.es accepted for publication january 5, 2001 un resumen en espan˜ol se incluye detra´s del texto principal de este artı´culo. introduction material and methods studies on the age and growth of cyprinids en- demic to the iberian peninsula have focused on the interpretation of ﬁsh vertebrae and scales. when the ﬁrst vertebrae is used, only specimens up to 8 years have been reported due to imprecise determi- nation of rings in older individuals (lucena & ca- macho 1978; lucena et al. 1979). moreover, her- rera (1991) and rodrı´guez-ruiz (1992) reported difﬁculties in determining the location of the ﬁrst ring in scales of older specimens due to the occur- rence of false marks. overall, otoliths have been considered the most accurate bone for age determination in slow-growing species (beamish & mcfarlane 1987), but its use to age cyprinids in uncommon. the objective of this study was therefore to vali- date otoliths for aging barbus sclateri günther 1868, one of most abundant members of stream ﬁsh assemblages in the southern iberian penin- sula. in particular, we attempt to detect annual formations in otoliths to meet the assumptions established by francis et al. (1992) and francis (1995): 1) the existence of periodical marks in the selected structure; 2) the ability to identify these marks correctly (including discrimination from ‘‘false’’ marks); and 3) the ability to convert the number of marks into age. 122 otoliths of 340 specimens of b. sclateri (60–315 mm, standard length) were collected monthly with electroﬁshing during a year in rio guadalete (southwestern spain) and in rio bocaleones, a major tributary. in contrast to the former stream, the latter is fed by springs and exhibits a rather homogeneous stream ﬂow and thermal regime throughout the year (prenda 1993). the recent construction of a dam upstream the mouth of rio bocaleones into rio guadalete prevented mixing of the two ﬁsh populations during the last 3 years. otoliths were obtained from fresh ﬁsh just after collection or from individuals frozen for a maxi- mum of 2 hours after collection. the otoliths were cleaned in a 10% sodium hypochloride solution (bleach), and rinsed with distilled water. then they were immersed in 95% ethanol and stored dry. based on previous assessments of these otoliths (escot & granado-lorencio, 1998), the right-side lapillus was placed into water and observed with a microscope at (cid:192)40 using reﬂected light on a black background. it was not necessary to clear them because these otoliths had clearly deﬁned opaque zones alternating with translucent zones, and the operation of reﬂected light made the opaque zone appear white and luminous, and the translucent zone appeared dark. otoliths reading in barbus sclateri results and discussion opaque and translucent zones in the whole lapillus were clearly visible (fig. 1). in several otoliths, the translucent zones were cleared to detect the main axis that became diffused when getting nearer the superior or inferior part of the otolith. translucent zones were observed in the edge of the otoliths throughout the year (fig. 2a), but the proportion of otoliths with a translucent zone showed an un- imodal annual cycle. over 80% of the otoliths showed a marginal translucent zone in april and may. more than 80% of the otoliths from rio gu- adalete exhibited a translucent edge in april, and those from rio bocaleones exhibited a translucent edge between march and june (fig. 2b, c). fig. 2. plot of percentage of otoliths with translucent edges (bars) and of the mean marginal increments (dark squares, with standard errors) during the study period. a. individuals of b. sclateri from both streams pooled. b. individuals from rio gu- adalete and c. individuals from rio bocaleones 123 fig. 1. a view of the whole lapillus of b. sclateri under magnify- ing glass, submerged into water on a black background with reﬂected light. the larger otolith above is from an 11 year old female, 260 mm total length, captured in rio bocaleones in november (bar‰1 mm). the smaller otolith below is from a 6 year old male, 92 mm total length, also captured rio bocaleon- es in january (bar‰0,5 mm). the black arrows indicate each annulus the distal portion of each translucent zone was considered the annullus. the term annullus is as- sociated with the translucent zone that is formed once a year in calciﬁced structures of ﬁshes grow- ing in temperate climates (casselman 1987). the areas of complete growth for each year were repre- sented by the combination of one opaque zone and a subsequent translucent zone. the number of an- nuli of the whole lapillus was counted along the longest antero-posterior axis on its dorsal face (anti-sulcal). we applied the marginal increase analysis method (baillon 1992) to validate age. this tech- nique encompasses qualitative and quantitative ex- amination of the otolith edge over the growth period. the percentage of the otolith with opaque or translucent zones on the edge was estimated (ross & stevens 1995; thompson & beckam 1995; yosef & casselman 1995); the width of the two most external zones of growth were measured (each opaque zone of the last annulus), and the relative width of the marginal increment (mi) was calculated as the ratio of the width of the actual growth zone to the width of the previous year’s growth zone (maceina & betsill 1987; gooley 1992; see also kalish et al. 1995 for the glossary of terms). escot & granado-lorencio table 1. analysis of the variance (anova) for the effects of capture time (month) and place (river) on the marginal increment (mi) of the otoliths of b. sclateri during the study period. the bonferroni comparisons were used to determine differences between adjacent means. source of variation sum of squares df mean squares f p month place month*place error feb‰mar‰apr‰may,jun‰jul‰aug,sep‰oct‰nov‰dec 3.76 0.09 0.81 16.50 0.38 0.09 0.08 0.06 10 1 10 289 6.58 ,0.0001 0.212 1.56 1.41 0.174 fig. 3. monthly variations of the mean marginal increment for the age-groups indicated in (a) rios guadalete and (b) boca- leones (b) the time of capture inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly in- ﬂuenced the amount of opaque material at the edge of the otolith (anova, p,0.0001), but no environmental inﬂuence was signiﬁcant (table 1) (fig. 2a, b, c). there were three differential stages of otolith growth throughout the year. the otolith growth appeared at a minimum between february to may and increased signiﬁcantly between june and september. given that there was a clear pattern in the opaque zone’s growth for each river dataset, we further tested whether the same pattern occurred in all age-classes. we selected age-groups so that we could compare the greatest number of ages and yet have an adequate sample size. these were 2–4, 124 5–8 and 9–16 years in rio guadalete, and 2–4, 5– 8, 9–12 and 13–18 years in rio bocaleones. as shown in fig. 3 those patterns were consistent among age-groups for both rivers. overall, the results conﬁrmed the presence of one opaque zone followed by a translucent zone in the barbel’s lapillus, and that the combination of both is formed once a year. a few false translucent zones were apparent, but they were easily detect- able because they did not occur in the areas above and below the nucleus. false zones were similar to those of the annuli, but they were found in only one part of the structure, similar to the results ob- tained by casselman (1987). the formation of the annulus in calciﬁed tissues is complete when the translucent zone, which forms once a year, is followed by opaque material (casselman 1987). this corresponded to the mini- mum marginal growth values detected for our bar- bel population. since, besides marginal growth, we included the periodical interpretation of the edge’s appearance (opaque or translucent percentages), we were able to determine the timing of the forma- tion of the two zones: the opaque zone was formed in both populations from july to january and the translucent zone was formed from february to june. further observations on the reproduction of in these streams suggest that repro- b. sclateri duction extends from february to june (lucena & camacho 1978; herrera et al. 1988; herrera 1991; rodrı´guez-ruiz 1992). francis (1995) considered the interpretation of the edge as a major factor in estimating age, yet it is important to distinguish between the time of the year when the zone is formed and the time when it becomes visible. we found that the otoliths show very ﬁne translucent edges during the period when opaque material in the edge most frequently ap- pears. this event has being termed pseudo-hyaline or pseudo-translucent edge (north 1988) and would be the time in the otolith’s growth when there is no difference between the opaque and the translucent zones. also, mina (1968) identiﬁed this problem of visual identiﬁcation of a zone: ‘‘...we can only observe that a new zone has been laid, when the change in the deposition of calcium has been enough to produce a change in the optical density of the material and therefore can be easily detected...’’ (see also lecomte-finiger 1992). this phenomenon can be further complicated when working with whole or sectioned otoliths where the zones correspond to three-dimensional layers, in contrast to ﬁne sections in which the zones are two-dimensional structures (francis 1992). from july to january (the time of greater fre- quency of opaque edges), our observations of trans- lucent zones were probably misinterpreted, and this resulted from difﬁculty to distinguish between translucent and the pseudo-translucent zones. be- cause during this period there were no apparent growth in this pseudo-translucent edge, and there was growth in the opaque zone, the formation of the latter may have taken place before winter in rio gu- adalete and before the end of winter and the onset of spring in rio bocaleones, and in the two rivers, the translucent zone was formed before the summer. once the rings were counted (annulli) they were converted into age. this last step is referred to by francis et al. (1992) as the interpretation of the edge. this implies a decision on the moment (or date) when the most external ring counted was formed. the conversion of the number of rings into age implies considerations on the relationship between this date and two previous dates, i.e., time of capture and birthdate (francis 1995). for this purpose, we took january 1 as the birth date for the two ﬁsh stocks, which may not necessarily co- incide with the date of natural birth (willliams & bedford 1974). consequently, the precise age of each individual ﬁsh was determined taking the fol- lowing criteria into account: 1) if the otolith had an opaque edge, the age was equal to the number of annulli, regardless of the date of capture. 2) if the otolith had a translucent edge, estimating the age depended on the date of capture as follows: if ﬁsh came from the july to december, the age was equal to the number of annulli with a posterior opaque zone, and if the ﬁsh came from january to june, age was equal to the number of annulli with a posterior opaque zone plus one. in conclusion, if the condition of the edge of the otolith is taken into consideration, otolith reading provides a useful alternative to other methods pre- viously applied for age determination in b. slcateri and probably in other cyprinids endemic to the ib- erian peninsula. resumen 1. utilizamos otolitos para determinar el momento de la foma- cio´n de anillos anuales en barbus sclateri. examenes microsco´- picos detallados pusieron de maniﬁesto la ocurrencia de zonas opacas y traslu´cidas en el lapillus cuya combinacio´n se produce una vez al an˜o. las zonas opacas aparecieron desde julio hasta enero mientras que las translu´cidas lo hicieron desde febrero hasta junio. 2. describimos un procedimiento para evaluar la edad utilizan- do el nu´mero de anillos, la condicio´n del lı´mite del otolito y la fecha de captura. la utilizacio´n de otolitos para determinar la edad de este ciprı´nido ende´mico de la penı´nsula ibe´rica oferta una alternativa a los me´todos ma´s tradicionales basados en lec- tura de escamas. acknowledgements this research was supported by the department of plant bi- ology and ecology and by the aquatic ecology station of sevil- otoliths reading in barbus sclateri la. we thank to all those who assisted during the successive stages of this study, especially dr. d. rodriguez, dr. l. encina, e. mellado and dr. j. prenda. references baillon, n. 1992. otolithometrie: revue et problemes. in: bagli- nie`re. j.l., castanet, j., conand, f. & meunier, f.j. (eds.). tissues durs et aˆge individuel des verte´bre´s. colloques et se´- minaires orstom-inra, paris, pp. 21–52. beamish, r.j. & mcfarlane, g.a. 1987. current trends in age determination methodology. in: summerfelt, r.c. & hall, g.e., ed. age and growth of ﬁsh. iowa state university press, pp. 15–42. casselman, j.m. 1987. determination of age and growth. in: weatherley, a.h. & h.s. gill, ed. the biology of ﬁsh growth. london: academic press, pp. 209–242. escot, c. & granado-lorencio, c. 1998. morphology of the otoliths of barbus sclateri (pisces: cyprinidae). journal of zoology 246, 89–94. francis, r.i.c.c. 1992. ageing of adult snapper (pagrus aur- atus) from otolith annual ring counts: validation by tagging and oxytetracycline injection. australian journal of marine and freshwater research 43: 1069–1089. francis, r.i.c.c. 1995. the analysis of otolith data – a math- ematician’s perspective (what, precisely, is your model?). in: secor, d.h., dean, j.m. & campana, s.e., ed. recent devel- opments in ﬁsh otolith research. charleston: university of south carolina press, pp. 81–95. francis, r.i.c.c., paul, l.j. & mulligan, k.p. 1992. ageing of adult snapper (pagrus auratus) from otolith annual rings counts: validation by tagging and oxytetracycline injection. australian journal of marine and freshwater research 43: 1069–1089. gooley, g.j. 1992. validation of the use of otoliths to determine the age and growth of murray cod, maccullochella peelii (mitchell) (perchichthyidae), in lake charlegrark, western victoria. australian journal of marine and freshwater re- search 43: 1091–1102. herrera, m. 1991. modelos en los ciclos de vida de una comun- idad de ciprı´nidos en un arroyo de primer orden de la cuenca del rı´o guadalquivir. ph.d. thesis. co´rdoba: universidad de co´rdoba. herrera, m., hernando, j.a., ferna´ndez-delgado, c. & belli- do, m. 1988. age, growth and reproduction of the barbel, barbus sclateri (günther 1868), in a ﬁrst-order stream in southern spain. journal of fish biology 33: 371–381. kalish, j.m., beamish, r.j., brothers, e.b., casselman, j.m., francis, r.i.c.c., mosegaard, h., panﬁli, j., prince, e.d., thresher, r.e., wilson, c.a. & wright, p.j. 1995. glossary for otolith studies. in: secor, d.h., dean, j.m. & campana, s.e., ed. recent developments in ﬁsh otolith research. charle- ston: university of south carolina press, pp. 723–729. lecomte–finiger, r. 1992. the crystalline ultrastructure of oto- liths of the eel (anguilla l. 1758). journal of fish biology 40: 181–190. lucena, j. & camacho, i. 1978. variaciones estacionales de al- gunos para´metros biolo´gicos en el barbo de sclater (barbus barbus sclateri günther). boletı´n de la real sociedad espan˜- ola de historia natural 76: 243–251. lucena, j., blasco, m. & camacho, i. 1979. estudio del crecimi- ento en peso y longitud del barbus barbus sclateri güthr. del embalse de cubillas. boletı´n de la real sociedad espan˜ola de historia natural 77: 479–488. maceina, j.m. & betsill, r.k. 1987. veriﬁcation and use of whole otoliths to age white crappie. in: r. c. summerfelt & g. e. hall, ed. age and growth of ﬁsh. ames: iowa state university press, pp. 45–64. mina, m.v. 1968. a note on a problem in the visual qualitative 125 escot & granado-lorencio evaluation of otolith zones. journal du conseil permanent pour l’exploration de la mer 32: 93–97. north, a.w. 1988. age of antarctic ﬁsh: validation of the timing of annuli formation in otoliths and scales. cybium 12: 107–114. prenda, j. 1993. uso del ha´bitat en algunas poblaciones de ani- males acua´ticos de un rı´o del sur de espan˜a: inﬂuencia de las interacciones bio´ticas. ph.d. thesis. universidad de sevilla, sevilla. rodrı´guez-ruiz, d. 1992. relacio´n entre la comunidad ı´ctica y la estructura del ha´bitat en un rı´o de re´gimen mediterra´neo. ph.d. thesis. universidad de sevilla, sevilla. ross, j.l. & stevens, t.m. 1995. age, growth, mortality, and reproductive biology of red drums in north carolina waters. transactions of the american fisheries society 124: 37–54. thompson, k.r. & beckman, d.w. 1995. validation of age es- the timates from white sucker otoliths. transactions of american fisheries society 124: 637–639. yosef, t.-g. & casselman, j.m. 1995. a procedure for increas- ing the precision of otolith age determination of tropical ﬁsh by differentiating biannual recruitment. in: secor, d.h., dean, j.m. & campana, s.e., ed. recent developments in ﬁsh otolith research. charleston: university of south carolina press, pp. 247–269. 126  