ecology of freshwater fish 2002: 11: 1 printed in denmark ` all rights reserved 10 years after copyright c blackwell munksgaard 2002 issn 0906-6691 javier lobo´n-cervia´ 1 and erik mortensen2 1museo nacional de ciencias naturales, csic, jose´ gutierrez abascal, 2, madrid 28006, spain, 2ornsovej 15, dk- 8600, silkeborg, denmark the idea for ‘ecology of freshwater fish’ (eff) arose largely from the need to cross-communicate interdisciplinary results obtained by single, special- ized theoretical and applied tendencies. always in- tended for a broad international audience, over 600 manuscripts from more than 20 countries have been considered by eff, and about 50% attained the standard required by the editorial board mem- bers for publication. the variety of topics contem- plated across the years represent in acute form the most state-of-the-art thinking in the ﬁeld of ecol- ogy of freshwater ﬁsh. such a high standard ap- pears responsible for the rapid incorporation of eff into numerous libraries currently consulted by ﬁsh ecologists and by international databases including the reputable current contents – science citation index, where, at the celebration of the 10th anniversary, eff received an impact factor of 1,04. to commemorate the 10th anniversary, this issue offers contributions by the authors of several in- vited papers: 1. testable models to predict traits relevant to understand habitat-related energy expenditures (grossman et al.). 2. the extent to which phenotypic plasticity vs. genetics is responsible for the life history vari- ability apparent in natural populations (mach- ado et al. and baker & foster). 3. the use of different levels of genetic markers to disentangle distinctness among populations and life histories (moran et al.). 4. the promising use of isotopes to understand the role of ﬁsh in complex trophic webs (leite et al.). these papers represent major lines of inquiry. the editors hope that the reader ﬁnds these key papers relevant and stimulating for future research. we would like to give warm thanks and acknow- ledgement to the ever-efﬁcient activities of the edi- torial board members, the numerous referees who offered their skills to eff and all authors who submitted their contributions to this international forum for scientiﬁc publication and debate. 1  