ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 453–463 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved ó 2006 the authors journal compilation ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish antipredator responses of two native stream ﬁshes to an introduced predator: does similarity in morphology predict similarity in behavioural response? nannini ma, belk mc. antipredator responses of two native stream ﬁshes to an introduced predator: does similarity in morphology predict similarity in behavioural response? ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 453–463. ó 2006 the authors. journal compilation ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard abstract – antipredator defences in prey species are moulded largely by predation. one general expectation is that an organism’s size, shape or morphology determines the optimal set of corresponding behavioural antipredator responses. we test the hypothesis that species with similar morphology and ecology exhibit similar antipredator responses by quantifying and comparing avoidance and escape responses of two similar species, leatherside chub and redside shiner. we also examine how antipredator responses of these two species translate into mortality using experimental stream enclosures. in the presence of brown_trout, redside shiner increased activity level, responded to a simulated attack sooner, quicker and had a more manoeuvrable escape than leatherside chub. predation by brown_trout decreased survival of both species, but caused higher levels of mortality in leatherside chub compared with redside shiner. similar morphology and ecology of these two prey species does not correspond to similarity in avoidance and escape responses, and this difference has consequences for the long-term survival of these species in the presence of introduced brown_trout. m. a. nannini, m. c. belk department of integrative biology, brigham young university, provo, ut, usa key words: antipredator behaviour; escape response; introduced predator; stream ﬁsh m. a. nannini, department of integrative biology, brigham young university, provo, ut 84602, usa; e-mail: mnannini@uiuc.edu present address: m. a. nannini, sam parr biological station, illinois natural history survey, 6401 meacham rd, kinmundy, il 62854, usa. accepted for publication april 22, 2006 introduction predation results in a wide array of behavioural antipredatory responses in prey (godin 1997; smith 1997; harvell & tollrian 1999), including beha- viours that act to reduce the probability of detection or attack (e.g., reduced activity or habitat shifts) and those that act to increase the probability of escape once an attack occurs (e.g., escape responses). energetic and opportunity costs of antipredator behavioural responses suggest there is likely some trade-off between pre- and postattack beha- vioural responses (sih 1987; lima & dill 1990). investment in one type of behavioural antipredator that response likely decreases the ability to employ another type of antipredator behaviour. for example, we expect sedentary benthic ﬁshes, which are less hydrodynamic, under threat of predation to rely more on crypsis than rapid ﬂight response. although behavioural been described in many species, less attention has been directed towards how speciﬁc responses are inte- grated within a species and how they relate to other types of antipredator response (e.g., morphology, life history) (godin 1997; anholt & werner 1999). antipredator responses have the general expectation is that an organism’s size, shape and/or morphology determines the optimal set of corresponding behavioural antipredator responses doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00177.x 453 nannini & belk for a given predator (fuiman 1994; godin 1997). for example, smaller organisms may be less likely to rely on rapid ﬂight from a predator, but more likely to rely on a decrease in activity rate because of the strong positive relationship between size and maximum ﬂight speed (fuiman 1994; scharf et al. 2003). freshwater zooplankton exhibit clear associations between size or shape and behavioural antipredator responses such as diel vertical migration or swimming speed (reviewed in de meester et al. 1999). similarly, in ﬁshes, morphological specialisation results in reduced beha- vioural options related to feeding and antipredator response. for example, ﬁsh that are adapted to body- caudal ﬁn propulsion are more likely to use bursts of speed for escape, whereas ﬁsh that are adapted to median and paired ﬁn propulsion may be more likely to rely on manoeuvrability (webb 1984). accordingly, we expect a similar and rather narrow range of behavioural antipredator responses from species with similar morphologies, habitat requirements and evo- lutionary histories. although correspondence between similarity in morphology, ecology and antipredator response is often assumed, the concept has seldom been explicitly tested (dewitt et al. 1999). two co-occurring species of small cyprinids, southern leatherside chub (lepi- domeda aliciae jouy; hereafter leatherside chub) and redside shiner (richardsonius balteatus richardson) provide good models for comparison of antipredator responses between similar species. both species are silver-coloured minnows of a similar size and shape (fig. 1). a landmark-based morphometric analysis of eight species of stream ﬁshes common to eastern great fig. 1. photographs of leatherside chub, lepidomeda aliciae (upper) and redside shiner, richardsonius balteatus (lower), illustrating similarity in body form of the two species. 454 basin streams indicated that leatherside chub and redside shiner cluster together along with dace and are distinct from salmonids and suckers. the euclidian distance between leatherside chub and redside shiner (0.0079) was about one-ﬁfth the mean distance between leatherside chub and all other species (0.039); and the euclidian distance between leather- side chub and redside shiner is lower for juveniles (0.0057; the size class used in these experiments) compared to that between adults (0.0096; m. belk, unpublished data). in addition, the ratio of standard length to mass did not differ between these two species (f1,185 ¼ 0.20, p ¼ 0.6585). both species are habitat generalists occupying a broad range of physical conditions where they occupy the mid-water column in main channel and backwater pools of rivers and streams feeding on small aquatic insects in the drift (reeves et al. 1987; walser et al. 1999; olsen 2000; wilson & belk 2001). they share a common evolu- tionary history characterised by long-term isolation with a relatively depauperate ﬁsh fauna in the bonneville basin of western north america (sigler & sigler 1987). in this paper we test the hypothesis that species with similar morphology, ecology and history exhibit similar antipredator responses by quantifying and comparing antipredator behavioural responses of these two cyprinids to an introduced predator. we show that both pre- and postattack antipredator behaviours differ dramatically and that these differences can lead to differences in mortality under ﬁeld conditions. materials and methods habitat use and activity level to determine habitat use and activity levels in response to a predator, we compared the behaviour of both species in the presence and absence of brown_trout in large experimental tanks. we used two 1100-l tanks that were 162.5 cm in diameter for experimental observation where fresh water would enter at one side of the tank and water would exit through a standpipe on the opposite side. water in the tanks was continu- ously aerated and water temperatures ranged from 12 to 14 °c throughout the course of the experiment. we simulated four habitat types of equal area in each experimental tank by combining presence and absence of vegetative structure (hereafter cover) and shallow and deep depths as follows: shallow water with no cover, shallow water with cover, deep water with no cover and deep water with cover. tanks were inclined such that shallow water had a mean depth of 9.4 cm and deep water had a mean depth of 47.1 cm. cover was provided by attaching buoyant, green polypropy- lene rope to a plastic mesh anchored to the bottom of )2. when the tank at a density of about 221 stemsæm the tanks were ﬁlled with water the free ends of the rope ﬂoated to the surface creating a structured habitat similar to that provided by rooted aquatic macro- phytes. we used the following precautions and procedures to ensure integrity of the experiment. we collected all prey (leatherside chub and redside shiner) and predators (brown_trout, salmo_trutta l.) from the same stream (main creek, wasatch co., utah) using the same electroshocking procedure. predators and prey were held in separate tanks similar to the tank and predators were fed prior to experimental experimental trials to minimise consumption of experimental prey. each prey species was observed in groups of ﬁve individuals (within the range of natural densities of these species in streams; walser et al. 1999, wilson & belk 2001). the same ﬁve individuals were observed with and without a predator (a single brown_trout) in a paired design, thus individuals served as their own controls in the experiment. the sequence of predator treatments (presence or absence of trout) and species tested (leatherside chub or redside shiner) was randomly assigned to avoid effects of treatment order. to minimise the effect of observer disturbance, we placed a 1.3-m opaque plastic barrier between the observer and the experimental tank, and observations were made through a small opening in the barrier. to quantify habitat use and activity level of each group of ﬁsh we used the following protocol. to start an experimental trial, we placed ﬁve individuals of either leatherside chub or redside shiner into the tanks and allowed them to acclimate for 30 min. individuals were included if their size fell between 50 and 60 mm standard length. acclimation time was based on pretrial observations that found ﬁsh behaviour did not change after 30 min. after acclimation, we recorded their behaviour for 30 min. to determine habitat use, we recorded the number of ﬁsh in each habitat type at 1-min intervals. to determine activity level, we randomly chose one of the ﬁve ﬁsh and observed it continually. at 30-s intervals we recorded whether the ﬁsh was swimming or resting. after the ﬁrst trial, the brown_trout was added or removed using a dip net. all prey ﬁsh were allowed to acclimate for an additional 10 min to account for the disturbance of trout addition or removal. ten minutes was determined to be the time when prey ﬁsh behaviour returned to normal after the disturbance in pretrial observations. after the second period of acclimation the second (paired) trial began and data were recorded in the same way as the ﬁrst trial. we completed 10 replicates of this design for each species by predator–treatment combination. no prey ﬁsh were consumed by the predator during experimental trials. antipredator responses of native stream ﬁsh to analyse the response of prey ﬁsh to treatments, we used a mixed model analysis of variance (anova). proportion of time swimming was used as our measure of activity level, and these data were log-transformed to increase normality and homoge- nise variances. log proportion of time swimming, mean number of ﬁsh in the cover and mean number of ﬁsh in the deep habitat were considered response variables, (presence or absence) and species of prey were considered explanatory variables. because treatments were applied to tanks, we used tank means for the analysis. fish group (each set of ﬁve ﬁsh) was considered a random effect. by considering ﬁsh group as a random variable, the analysis was similar to an unreplicated randomised block design and accounted for the paired structure in the data. and predator treatment escape response to evaluate escape response we quantiﬁed response of prey to a simulated predator attack. we used leather- side chub and redside shiner collected from the same populations as those above. fish were placed in an octagon-shaped arena measuring 58 cm in diameter with a water depth of 10 cm. the arena included a clear cylindrical holding chamber in the centre meas- uring 10 cm in diameter. each trial involved placing an individual ﬁsh in the individual had holding chamber. when the test stopped moving and was facing an appropriate direction (detailed below), we simulated an attack by propelling a model brown_trout that entered the arena through swinging doors at a constant, rapid speed towards the position of the test ﬁsh. we recorded the response of the test ﬁsh using a panasonic digital camera (ag-ez1; secaucus, usa) with a speed of 60 frames per second. to determine if the angle of attack altered escape responses, we tested two attack angles: frontal (model entered arena directly in front of test ﬁsh) and lateral (test ﬁsh was facing perpendicular to the place where the model entered the arena and whether the left or right side of the prey ﬁsh was facing the predator was allowed to vary). we allowed the direction that the test ﬁsh was facing to vary within 45° to either side of these two directions. overall, we tested 69 leatherside chub and 71 redside shiner with frontal attacks, and 26 leatherside chub and 26 redside shiner with lateral attacks. individual ﬁsh were not measured at both attack angles so that each attack angle was an independent measure of the species response to the simulated attack. we measured six variables from videotaped responses of each ﬁsh as reaction distance: measured as the distance between the test follows: (i) 455 nannini & belk ﬁsh and the model predator when the ﬁsh ﬁrst reacted; (ii) fast start: measured as the time it took the test ﬁsh to complete the c-start (the transition from resting to ﬂight) portion of its escape response; (iii) speed: measured as the straight-line distance between the test ﬁsh’s position at the end of the c-start phase and its position three frames later, divided by time; (iv) distance moved: measured as the straight-line distance between the starting posi- tion of the test ﬁsh and its position when the model predator had completed its forward motion; (v) escape trajectory: measured as the angle that the test ﬁsh moved in response to the oncoming model predator, with 0° being directly toward the predator and 180° being directly away from the predator. angle was measured without respect to right or left sides; (vi) number of directional changes: measured the test ﬁsh changed as direction during the c-start reaction was counted as the ﬁrst change in direction. because of the possibility that performance might be dependent on size, we used standard length as a covariate (see below). in certain cases one or more of the response measures could not be obtained for a particular individual due to an obstructed view. therefore, some response variables have smaller sample sizes than others resulting in slight variation in degrees of freedom among statistical tests. escape. the initial the number of times to determine if there was a difference in escape response between species or between attack angles we used a staged statistical analysis. initially, we used a multivariate analysis of covariance (mancova) inclu- ding all response variables and standard length as a covariate to determine if there was an overall effect of at least one of the response variables between species when correlations between variables were taken into account. this analysis produced a signiﬁcant result (k1,2.5,65.5 ¼ 0.5633, f7,133 ¼ 14.73, p < 0.0001), so we used individual response variables (excepting number of directional changes) in separate univariate analyses of covariance (ancova) with species and angle of attack as main effects and standard length as the covariate. as the overall mancova was signiﬁcant, no further adjustment to correct for experimentwise error was needed (hummel & sligo 1971). number of directional changes was analysed using a generalised linear model assuming a poisson distribution and a log link function (sas 1993), with standard length as a covariate. to determine how the six response variables were related in differentiating between species, we used discriminant function analysis (dfa) with species as the classiﬁcation criterion (sas 1990). to account for variation due to the size of the ﬁsh, we used residuals from a regression of each variable on standard length as variables in the dfa. 456 field experiment to determine mortality rates of redside shiner and leatherside chub under ﬁeld conditions, mortality in enclosed segments of a natural stream in the presence and absence of brown_trout was measured. the experiment was conducted in a section of main creek, utah (wasatch co. 40°24¢n, 111°28¢w) over a period of 5 weeks beginning in july 2000. main creek is a small tributary (mean stream width of 3 m) of the provo river. mean depth varies from a few centime- tres in rifﬂes to a maximum of about 1.5 m in pools. habitat consists of alternating pools with ﬁne sedi- ments and rifﬂes with larger substrates. willow (salix sp.) is common along the stream bank and it provides numerous root wads that create structure in the streams. rooted and ﬂoating aquatic vegetation is common in summer in slower sections of the stream. both native cyprinid species and a self-sustaining population of brown_trout occur in the section of stream used for these experiments. upstream and downstream barriers were construc- ted consisting of 0.64-cm mesh to create replicate enclosed sections of stream, each 10 m in stream length. each enclosure included shallow and deep water sections as well as structural habitat provided by aquatic vegetation or woody debris. all ﬁsh from enclosures were removed by repeated passes with a backpack electroshocking unit. collected debris was removed from barriers as needed throughout the duration of the experiments to allow free ﬂow of water through the barriers. the experiment consisted of two treatments: leath- erside chub and redside shiner with and without brown_trout. a pilot study found that juvenile mortality was signiﬁcantly higher than adult mortality in the pres- ence of brown_trout predation (olsen 2000), so only juvenile size classes were used (<60 mm sl; johnson et al. 1995) in this experiment. all treatments con- tained 20 juvenile leatherside chub and 20 juvenile redside shiner. we made a concerted effort to match sizes of the two species by making sure that the individual size fell between 50 and 60 mm sl. as noted above the ratio of standard length to mass did not differ between these two species (f1,185 ¼ 0.20, p ¼ 0.6585). in treatments with brown_trout, we used three brown_trout >30 cm sl. densities of leatherside chub, redside shiner and brown_trout in enclosures were within the range of densities observed in natural stream populations of these three species of ﬁsh (wilson 1996; walser et al. 1999; olsen & belk 2005). to begin the experiment, three brown_trout were randomly assigned to two of the four enclosures and allowed to acclimate 3 days prior to the introduction of prey to allow them to recover from handling and to standardise hunger level. after this period, 20 of each prey species were placed into each enclosure and left for 4 days. at the end of the 4-day trial, surviving ﬁsh were removed via electroshocking and the remaining individuals of each species were counted. two treat- ment replicates were completed (four enclosures) each week for 5 weeks for a total of 10 replicates per treatment. the analysis consisted of a mixed model repeated measures analysis of variance (sas 1990) on survi- vorship. time (week of experiment) and enclosure were treated as random effects, while predator treat- ment, species and a predator treatment by species interaction were explanatory variables. a week by enclosure interaction was included as a repeated measure (because the same enclosures were used repeatedly). proportion surviving for each species was logit (base e) transformed to meet assumptions of normality. odds ratios were interpreted from the results of the analysis by taking the inverse natural log (ln) of the difference between logit (value for treatment 1) and logit (value for treatment 2). the analysis allowed us to determine if the trout predation affected overall survivorship (trout presence/absence main effect), if overall survivorship of the two species was different from one another (species main effect) and the trout by species interaction allowed us to determine if the trout affected survivorship of the two prey species differently. results in or deep water habitat use and activity level mean number of ﬁsh in the cover (f1,36 ¼ 0.56, p ¼ 0.4605) (f1,18 ¼ 0.14, p ¼ 0.7112) was not signiﬁcantly affected by predator presence or absence, nor did they differ by species (f1,36 ¼ 1.71, p ¼ 0.1989 and f1,18 ¼ 1.10, p ¼ 0.3072 for cover and deep water, respectively, fig. 2a,b). most individuals spent the majority of the time in the deep water with cover. however, activity level (log proportion time swimming) was signiﬁ- (f1,18 ¼ 13.06, cantly different between species p ¼ 0.0005) and there was a signiﬁcant inter- and species action between predator (f1,18 ¼ 15.26, chub decreased activity level in the presence of brown_trout, whereas, redside shiner signiﬁcantly increased activity level in the presence of brown_trout (fig. 2c). p ¼ 0.0001). leatherside treatment escape response reaction distances of redside shiner were signiﬁ- cantly greater leatherside chub in that redside shiner reacted to the oncoming attack sooner than for antipredator responses of native stream ﬁsh (a) f o r e b m u n n a e m  r e v o c e h t n i s l a u d i v i d n i (b) f o r e b m u n n a e m  p e e d e h t n i s l a u d i v i d n i 5 4 3 5 4 (c) 100 g n i m m w s e m i i t t n e c r e p 80 60 40 20 0 no predator predator predator treatment fig. 2. use of (a) cover and (b) depth by leatherside chub (closed circle) and redside shiner (open circle). (c) activity level of leatherside chub (closed circle) and redside shiner (open circle) with and without brown_trout present. error bars represent mean ±2 se. than did leatherside chub (table 1, fig. 3a). angle of simulated attack signiﬁcantly affected reaction distance (table 1). both species reacted earlier to lateral attacks (fig. 3a). there was a weak positive relationship between body size (the covariate) and reaction distance (table 1). redside shiner had a signiﬁcantly more rapid fast start than leatherside chub (fig. 3b), but there was no apparent effect of angle of attack (table 1). fast start time was positively related to body size (table 1). 457 nannini & belk table 1. univariate analysis of variance for ﬁve escape response variables. variable effect num d.f. mean squares f-value p reaction distance species fast start speed distance moved stim. dir. sp · stim. dir. size error species stim. dir. sp · stim. dir. size error species stim. dir. sp · stim. dir. size error species stim. dir. sp · stim. dir. size error escape direction species stim. dir. sp · stim. dir. size error 1 1 1 1 187 1 1 1 1 137 1 1 1 1 137 1 1 1 1 186 1 1 1 1 187 12.69 30.11 1.77 3.73 320.83 761.35 44.71 115.75 25.28 4.40 0.00075 0.00019 1.10 0.000011 0.07 0.0026 15.49 0.00017 423.33 183.22 0.03 7545.29 519.66 4.17 48.81 6.66 200.70 13.37 548.31 909.11 13331.36 2820.39 2763.01 0.81 0.35 0.00 14.52 0.31 3.65 0.50 15.01 0.20 0.33 4.82 1.02 0.0005 0.0001 0.1852 0.0548 0.0377 0.2959 0.7988 0.0001 0.3683 0.5536 0.9944 0.0002 0.5772 0.0576 0.4810 0.0001 0.6565 0.5669 0.0293 0.3136 num d.f., numerator degrees of freedom; sp, species; stim. dir., stimulus direction. speed did not differ between species or angles of attack (table 1, fig. 3c). however, speed was signi- ﬁcantly positively related to body size (table 1). distance moved during attack did not differ between species, but was marginally signiﬁcantly different between angles of attack (table 1). distance moved was greater for both species when attacks were from a lateral direction (fig. 3d). distance moved was signiﬁcantly and positively related to body size (table 1). escape trajectory did not differ between species or angles of attack, nor was body size signiﬁcantly related (table 1). however, there was a signiﬁcant interaction between species and angle of attack. leatherside chub shift their escape trajectory toward the predator when attack angle moves from frontal to lateral, whereas redside shiner shift their escape trajectory away from the predator when attack angle changes from frontal to lateral (fig. 3e). number of directional changes differed signiﬁcantly between species (v2 ¼ 32.9561, p ¼ 0.0001). red- side shiner were over two times more likely to change direction while ﬂeeing as leatherside chub (ratio 1:0.405; fig. 3f). the number of directional changes also varied signiﬁcantly and positively with size (v2 ¼ 5.3285, p ¼ 0.0210). larger individuals made signiﬁcantly more directional changes. there was no effect of angle of attack (v2 ¼ 0.8052, p ¼ 0.3695), nor was there an interaction. 458 discriminant function analysis yielded an overall signiﬁcant difference in escape responses between species (k1,2,66 ¼ 0.689, f6,134 ¼ 10.09, p < 0.0001). three variables had high standardised discriminant function coefﬁcients. number of changes in direction was the most important variable in distinguishing between species, followed by distance moved and reaction distance (table 2). field experiment predator treatment and prey species were signiﬁcant predictors of survival, and the predator by species interaction was marginally signiﬁcant (table 3. for the leatherside chub and redside shiner combined, the odds of surviving with no brown_trout present were nearly eight times higher than odds of surviving with trout present (logit odds ratio 1:0.128). overall, the odds of leatherside chub surviving were about three times higher than the odds of redside shiner surviving (logit odds ratio 1:0.377). however, this effect is almost entirely due to lower survival of redside shiner in the absence of brown_trout. brown_trout had a greater impact on leatherside chub survivorship than on redside shiner survivorship (fig. 4). for leatherside chub, the odds of surviving in the absence of brown_trout were 16 times higher than the odds of surviving with trout present (logit odds ratio 1:0.063). for redside shiner, on the other hand, the odds of surviving in the absence of brown_trout were only four times higher than the odds of surviving in the presence of trout (logit odds ratio 1:0.262). redside shiner mortality appeared to be affected more by factors unrelated to predation (e.g., handling and environmental inﬂuences in enclosures), whereas, leatherside chub mortality was affected more by apparent predation by brown_trout. discussion shiner exhibit contrasting contrary to the expectation that species with similar morphology and ecology should exhibit similar anti- predator behavioural responses, leatherside chub and redside antipredator responses. why do these similar species exhibit such different antipredator responses? part of this difference may be due to the isolated evolutionary history of ﬁsh in this basin. aquatic organisms in the bonneville basin have been semi-isolated from surrounding inﬂuences for 10–27 million years (hocutt & wiley 1986). historically, the only potentially piscivorous ﬁsh species in this system was bonneville cutthroat trout (oncorhynchus clarki utah suckley). although cutthroat trout become piscivorous at large sizes, they typically only reach these sizes when they move into large rivers and lake systems. in smaller rivers and streams, bonneville cutthroat trout remain relatively ) m c ( e c n a t s i  d n o i t c a e r ) s / m c ( d e e p s 15 10 80 75 70 65 fig. 3. mean escape responses for leather- side chub and redside shiner at two angles of attack. open circles indicate lateral attack angles, while closed circles indicate frontal attack angles. the response varia- bles (a) reaction distance, (b) fast start, (c) speed, (d) total distance moved, (e) escape trajectory and (f) number of directional changes are plotted for each species. error bars represent mean ±2 se. ) s e e r g e d ( y r o t c e j a r t 120 100 80 e p a c s e 60 antipredator responses of native stream ﬁsh 20 (a) 0.060 (b) ) s ( e m i t t r a t s t s a f 0.055 0.050 0.045 0.040 10 (d) ) m c ( d e v o m e c n a t s i d 9 8 7 6 5  h s i f f o n o i t r o p o r p 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 leatherside chub  redside shiner (f) leatherside chub redside shiner 1 4 number of directional changes 2 3 (c) (e) leatherside chub  redside shiner table 2. standardised discriminant response variables. function coefﬁcients for escape variable standardised discriminant function coefﬁcient 0.3379 reaction distance )0.1484 fast start 0.1773 speed )0.3676 distance moved )0.0788 escape direction number of directional changes 0.8665 table 3. mixed model analysis of variance of logit survival. effect num d.f. den d.f. f-value p predation species predator · species 1 1 1 6.43 18 18 20.63 7.06 3.79 0.0033 0.0161 0.0674 num d.f., numerator degrees of freedom; den d.f., denominator degrees of freedom. small and rarely feed on ﬁsh (may et al. 1978). thus, populations of stream-dwelling ﬁshes native to the bonneville basin were exposed to relatively weak predation pressure during much of their evolutionary history. t u o r t t u o h t i w o t d e r a p m o c t u o r t h t i i w g n v v r u s i f o s d d o 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 redside shiner leatherside chub species fig. 4. odds of surviving with brown_trout compared to the odds of surviving in the absence of brown_trout. odds were obtained by taking the inverse ln of the difference between logit (survival) with trout and logit (survival) without trout. error bars represent mean ±2 se. 459 nannini & belk weak or absent selective pressure from predation can result in loss or degradation of antipredator responses (coss 1999). long periods of isolation with low threat of predation can result in near complete loss of antipredator responses (e.g., ﬂightlessness or lack of perceived threat by many island species). on a shorter time scale, apparently maladaptive responses to threat of predation can evolve (johnsson et al. 1996; magurran 1999; brown & laland 2001). when prey maintain antipredator responses in the absence of a strong predatory threat, they incur the costs of the response (less time for foraging and reproducing means fewer resources to devote to reproduction), but do not receive any beneﬁt relative to individuals without a speciﬁc antipredator response. thus, costly antipredator responses may be selected against in low predation environments (magurran 1999). even indu- cible antipredator responses that may be considered selectively neutral in the absence of predation may diverge among species as a result of mutation and decay in the genes controlling these traits (coss 1999). thus, antipredator responses of species that have experienced relatively low levels of predation over long periods of time may diverge because there is no selection for efﬁciency in antipredator response. given the marked difference in avoidance behav- iours and escape responses between redside shiner and leatherside chub, we would expect a difference in observed mortality between the species as well. brown_trout, which were introduced into many streams and rivers in the great basin, inﬂicted high mortality on both of these species. this is consistent with other studies that have found that brown_trout can be highly piscivourous when introduced into streams with high abundance of small native ﬁsh (garman & nielson 1982; zalewski et al. 1985). although mortality is high for both species we ﬁnd proportionally higher mortality on leatherside chub than on redside shiner, suggesting that that leatherside chub may be more vulnerable to brown_trout predation than redside shiner. is avoidance behaviour or escape response most important in determining the relative vulnerabilities of these two species? effectiveness of avoidance behav- iours depends on characteristics of the habitat and the predator (smith 1997). reductions in activity level in the presence of predators, as exhibited by leatherside chub, are associated with decreased probability of detection and attack (lawler 1989; lima & dill 1990; azevedo-ramos et al. 1992), especially from actively searching predators. increased activity levels in the presence of predators, such as that observed in redside shiners, may represent an attempt by prey to locate predator-free space or to avoid sedentary predators (hews & blaustein 1985; hews 1988). for example, in habitats where predators are patchily distributed, 460 to predator-free locations rates of prey movement increases (e.g., gilliam & fraser 2001). such responses are well documented in stream systems where predators increase the fragmented distribution of prey ﬁshes (schlosser 1987; fraser et al. 1995; gilliam & fraser 2001). in habitats where predators are patchily distributed (e.g., small streams with large brown_trout) increased activity associated with move- ment to predator-free patches may be a more effective response. however, our experimental design makes it unlikely that the differences between leatherside chub and redside shiner avoidance behaviour could explain differences in mortality rates. in this experiment, prey and predators were conﬁned to a 10-m stretch of stream, with a relatively high density of predators. given this design constraint, one would expect that prey that rely on avoiding proximity (i.e., redside shiner) would have a harder time avoiding contact with brown_trout than prey that rely on avoiding detection (i.e., leatherside chub). if redside shiner are increasing their activity level with nowhere to go, one would expect the attack rate from brown_trout to be higher on redside shiner than on leatherside chub, as moving prey are more easily detected than stationary prey (morin 1983; lawler 1989). if avoidance beha- viour was the most important determinant for the observed mortality in this ﬁeld study, one would expect redside shiner to be preyed upon preferentially resulting in higher predator-related mortality for redside shiner. (godin 1997). some elements of instead leatherside chub appear to have a higher mortality. leatherside chub have a slower and less complex escape response. effectiveness of escape responses depends on the attack style and size of predators the escape response are consistently related to escape success. higher ﬂight speed (fuiman 1993; katzir & camhi 1993), speed of fast start (fuiman 1993) and high degree of manoeuvrability (domenici & blake 1991) are typically positively associated with escape success. for large, ambush predators, such as brown_trout, greater reaction distance and total ﬂight distance are also associated with escape success (godin 1997). shiner redside from this population exhibit increased activity levels, greater reaction distance, more rapid fast start and more manoeuvrability in escape compared to leatherside chub. each of these elements seems to predict greater avoidance and escape success for redside shiners. these results corroborate observed distribution patterns of these three species in the ﬁeld. leatherside chub distribution throughout the bonneville basin shows a negative correlation with brown_trout distribution, whereas redside shiner distribution shows no such correlation (wilson & belk 2001; m. belk, unpublished data). overall, these results suggest that redside shiner are likely less vulnerable than leatherside chub to brown_trout predation. why do redside shiners have an apparently more advanced escape response than leatherside chub? per- haps the difference lies in the historical habitat associa- tions of these two species. fossil evidence suggests that redside shiner were common residents of large, pluvial lakes (e.g., lake bonneville and lake idaho, smith 1975; broughton 2000). in addition, redside shiner currently maintain populations in reservoirs and lakes whereas, leatherside chub do not (m. belk, unpublished data). thus, redside shiner in the bonneville basin likely had more exposure to the large lake form of cutthroat trout. although streams may not have had large predators, redside shiner populations in them were likely connected to lake populations (via gene ﬂow) that were exposed to higher levels of predation. as a result, redside shiner may have maintained or evolved an apparently more successful escape response. in addition, length of isolation from more intense predation may play a role in the differences in antipredator response of these two species. current distribution of the redside shiner extends beyond the bonneville basin, into the paciﬁc northwest (sigler & sigler 1987). current distribution of leatherside chub, on the other hand, appears to be conﬁned to the bonneville basin and upper snake river drainage (sigler & sigler 1987). this suggests that leatherside chub may have been isolated for a much longer period of time. if this was the case, the longer isolation by leatherside chub, experiencing more relaxed predatory inﬂuences from cutthroat trout, may have decreased the effectiveness of leatherside chub antipredator responses compared to redside shiner. in addition to possible differences in the evolution- these two species there may be ary history of differences in the physiology of these two prey species. it is possible that differences in the structure of the eye results in the ability of redside shiner to detect predatory threats at a greater distance. likewise differences in the sensitivity of the lateral line system could also allow redside shiner to detect the threat or attack of a brown_trout when it is further away. while our study does a good job of describing the differences in antipredator responses of these two species, future work on the physiological basis of these differences is clearly warranted. these data suggest an important role for direct predation by brown_trout in streams of the bonneville basin. however, it is worth noting that these direct effects are not the only potential effects caused by the presence of brown_trout. changes in the behaviours of both these species could potentially have indirect effects associated with them. reduced activity of leatherside chub in the presence of brown_trout may antipredator responses of native stream ﬁsh lead to decreased growth rates and subsequent changes in size and age at maturity and fecundity (tollrian 1995; persson et al. 1996; belk 1998). therefore, indirect to determine the full impact of brown_trout predation on these two native prey species. interactions must be studied as well, another species. antipredator results of this study have important management implications for native species exposed to novel predation pressure. individual species that appear to be similar in most respects may exhibit divergent antipredator response strategies that make one species more vulnerable to negative population level effects than responses employed by leatherside chub and redside shiner were used to correctly predict that leatherside chub should be more vulnerable to the effects of brown_trout predation than redside shiner. thus, in systems in which removing an introduced predator is impossible, as is the case with brown_trout, understanding what defences native prey have to the predator can help in focusing management efforts on those species most vulnerable. in certain types of antipredator responses, managers may be able to train or select individuals that are better able to avoid predation similar to what has been done with some success for hatchery reared ﬁshes (berejikian et al. 1999; mirza & chivers 2000; brown & laland 2001). if vulnerable species are deﬁcient habitat restoration efforts can also target the creation of habitat types and associations that maxim- ise the probability of coexistence of vulnerable species with introduced predators. for example, although leatherside chub antipredator responses, particularly their escape response, seems inadequate to deal with the predation pressure caused by brown_trout, leath- erside chub do shift habitat use to offchannel habitats when brown_trout are present (olsen & belk 2005). therefore, habitat restorations that increase availabil- ity of offchannel habitats in stream systems containing brown_trout might increase the probability of main- taining a viable population of this vulnerable species. in summary, despite similar morphology and ecology leatherside chub and redside shiner in main creek exhibit different avoidance behaviours and escape responses to introduced brown_trout. an understanding of antipredator responses suggest that redside shiner appear to be better suited to avoiding predation by introduced brown_trout, and manipulative ﬁeld experiments conﬁrmed this prediction. conclusions 1. antipredator responses and morphologies in prey species are moulded largely by predation. one general expectation is that an organism’s size, shape or morphology determines set of the optimal 461 nannini & belk that corresponding behavioural antipredator responses. we tested the hypothesis species with similar morphology and ecology exhibit similar antipredator responses by quantifying and comparing avoidance and escape responses of two similar species, southern leatherside chub (lepidomeda aliciae) and redside shiner (richardsonius balteatus), to an introduced predator, brown_trout (salmo_trutta). in the presence of brown_trout, leatherside chub decreased activity level, whereas redside shiner increased activity level compared to activity without brown_trout. escape responses also differed between species. redside shiner exhibited a more rapid fast start response, they responded sooner to the stimulus (greater reaction distance), and had more frequent directional changes while ﬂeeing compared with leatherside chub. 2. the antipredator strategies exhibited by these two species indicated that the strategy used by leatherside chub should be less effective against brown_trout predation than the strategy employed by redside shiner. as such, we also examined how antipredator responses of these two species translate into mortality in a ﬁeld setting by examining survival of these prey exposed to predation in experimental stream enclo- sures in central utah. presence of brown_trout signiﬁcantly decreased survival of both species, how- ever, brown_trout caused signiﬁcantly higher levels of mortality in leatherside chub compared with redside shiner. 3. similar morphology and ecology of leatherside chub and redside shiner does not correspond to similarity in avoidance and escape responses, and this difference results in a difference in vulnerability to brown_trout under ﬁeld conditions. the difference in antipredator responses may result from an evo- lutionary history with relatively weak predation these populations. under experienced by both of such antipredatory responses may have been adequate to avoid preda- tion. however, under a novel threat from a more efﬁcient introduced predator the less effective strat- egy employed by leatherside chub make this species more vulnerable to predation by introduced brown_trout. conditions several possible acknowledgements this research was funded by the utah division of wildlife resources, contract no. r0401025. we would like to thank b. schaalje for his help with the analysis, a. ashton for the use of his land. c. creighton, b. rashleigh, d. shiozawa, h. black and k. crandall all provided valuable suggestions on earlier drafts. we thank l. mcteer for his help in the construction of ‘the arena of fear’. we thank d. houston, d. olsen, j. baker, d. gonzalez and s. thatcher, for their help in carrying out ﬁeld experiment and m. whitney, d. houston, j. jordan and j. baker 462 for their help with the set up of the experiments and with collection of ﬁsh. references anholt, b.r. & werner, e.e. 1999. density-dependent in: tollrian, r. & consequences of harvell, c.d., eds. the ecology and evolution of inducible defenses. princeton, nj: princeton university press, pp. 218– 230. induced behaviour. azevedo-ramos, c., sluys, m.v., hero, j.m. & magnusson, w.e. 1992. inﬂuence of tadpole movement on predation by odonate naiads. journal of herpetology 26: 335–338. belk, m.c. 1998. predator-induced delayed maturity in bluegill sunﬁsh (lepomis macrochirus): variation among populations. oecologia 113: 203–209. berejikian, b.a., smith, r.j.f., tezak, e.p., schroder, s.l. & knudsen, c.m. 1999. chemical alarm signals and complex hatchery rearing habitats affect antipredator behaviour and survival of chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha) juveniles. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 56: 830–838. broughton, j.m. 2000. terminal pleistocene ﬁsh remains from homestead cave, utah, and implications for ﬁsh biogeogra- phy in the bonneville basin. copeia 2000: 645–656. brown, c. & laland, k. 2001. social learning and life skills training for hatchery reared ﬁsh. journal of fish biology 59: 471–493. coss, r.g. 1999. effects of relaxed natural selection on the evolution of behaviour. in: foster, s.a. & endler, j.a., eds. geographic variation in behaviour: perspectives on evolu- tionary mechanisms. oxford: oxford university press, pp. 180–208. de meester, l., dawidowicz, p., van gool, e. & loose, c.j. 1999. ecology and evolution of predator-induced behavior of zooplankton: depth selection behavior and diel vertical migration. in: tollrian, r. & harvell, c.d., eds. the ecology and evolution of inducible defenses. princeton, nj: princeton university press, pp. 160–176. dewitt, t.j., sih, s. & hucko, j.a. 1999. trait compensation and cospecialization in a freshwater snail: size, shape and antipredator behaviour. animal behaviour 58: 397– 407. domenici, p. & blake, r.w. 1991. the kinematics and performance of the escape response in the angelﬁsh (pterophyllum eimekei). journal of experimental biology 156: 187–205. fraser, d.f., gilliam, j.f. & yip-hoi, t. 1995. predation as an agent of population fragmentation in a tropical watershed. ecology 76: 1461–1472. fuiman, l.a. 1993. development of predator evasion in atlantic herring, clupea harengus l. animal behaviour 45: 1101–1116. fuiman, l.a. 1994. the interplay of ontogeny and scaling in the interactions of ﬁsh larvae and their predators. journal of fish biology 45 (suppl. a): 55–79. garman, g.c. & nielson, l.a. 1982. piscivority by stocked brown_trout (salmo_trutta) and its impact on the nongame ﬁsh community of bottom creek, virginia. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 39: 862–869. gilliam, j.f. & fraser, d.f. 2001. movement in corridors: enhancement by predation threat, disturbance, and habitat structure. ecology 82: 258–273. godin, j.-g.j. 1997. evading predators. in: godin, j-g.j., ed. teleost ﬁshes. oxford: oxford behavioural ecology of university press, pp. 191–236. harvell, c.d. & tollrian, r. 1999. why inducible defenses? in: tollrian, r. & harvell, c.d., eds. the ecology and evolution of inducible defenses. princeton, nj: princeton university press, pp. 3–9. hews, d.k. 1988. alarm response in larval western toads, bufo boreas: release of larval chemicals by a natural predator and its effect on predator capture efﬁciency. animal behaviour 36: 125–133. hews, d.k. & blaustein, a.r. 1985. an investigation of the alarm response in bufo boreas and rana cascadae tadpoles. behavioral and neural biology 43: 47–57. hocutt, c.h. & wiley, e.o. 1986. the zoogeography of north american freshwater ﬁshes. new york: wiley. hummel, t.j. & sligo, j. 1971. empirical comparison of univariate and multivariate analysis of variance procedures. psychology bulletin 76: 49–57. johnson, j.b., belk, m.c. & shiozawa, d.k. 1995. age, growth, and reproduction of leatherside chub (gila copei). great basin naturalist 55: 183–187. johnsson, j.i., petersson, e., jo¨nsson, e., bjo¨rnsson, b.t. & ja¨rvi, t. 1996. domestication and growth hormone alter antipredator behaviour and growth patterns in juvenile brown_trout, salmo_trutta. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 53: 1546–1554. katzir, g. & camhi, j.m. 1993. escape response of black mollies (poecilia sphenops) to predatory dives of a pied kingﬁsher (ceryle rudis). copeia 1993: 549–553. lawler, s.p. 1989. behavioural responses to predators and predation risk in four species of larval anurans. animal behaviour 38: 1039–1047. lima, s.l. & dill, l.m. 1990. behavioral decisions made under the risk of predation: a review and prospectus. canadian journal of zoology 68: 619–640. magurran, a.e. 1999. the causes and consequences of geographic variation in antipredator behaviour: perspectives from ﬁsh populations. in: foster, s.a. & endler, j.a., eds. geographic variation in behaviour: perspectives on evolu- tionary mechanisms. oxford: oxford university press, pp. 139–163. may, b.e., leppink, j.d. & wydoski, r.s. 1978. distribution, systematics, and biology of the bonneville cutthroat trout, salmo clarki utah. publication 78–15, utah division of wildlife resources, northern region, ogden, ut, usa. mirza, r.s. & chivers, d.p. 2000. predator-recognition training enhances survival of brook_trout: evidence from laboratory and ﬁeld-enclosure studies. canadian journal of zoology 78: 2198–2208. morin, p.j. 1983. predation, competition, and the composition of larval anuran guilds. ecological monographs 53: 119– 138. olsen, d.g. 2000. effects of introduced brown_trout, salmo_trutta on habitat use and mortality rates of native stream antipredator responses of native stream ﬁsh ﬁshes in central utah. ms thesis. provo, ut: brigham young university. olsen, d.g. & belk, m.c. 2005. relationship of diurnal habitat use of native stream ﬁshes of the eastern great basin to presence of introduced salmonids. western north american naturalist 65: 501–506. persson, l., andersson, j., wahlstrom, e. & eklov, p. 1996. size-speciﬁc interactions in lake systems: predator gape limitation and prey growth rate and mortality. ecology 77: 900–911. reeves, g.h., everest, f.h. & hall, j.d. 1987. interactions between the redside shiner (richardsonius balteatus) and the steelhead trout (salmo gairdneri) in western oregon: the inﬂuence of water temperature. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 44: 1603–1613. sas 1990. sas user’s guide: statistics, version 6 edn. cary, nc: sas institute inc. sas 1993. sas technical report p-243, sas/stat software: the genmod procedure, release 6.09. cary, nc: sas institute inc. scharf, f.s., buckel, j.a., mcginn, p.a. & juanes, f. 2003. vulnerability of marine forage ﬁshes to piscivory: effects of prey behavior on susceptibility to attack and capture. journal of experimental marine biology and ecology 294: 41–59. schlosser, i.j. 1987. the role of predation in age and size- related habitat use by stream ﬁshes. ecology 68: 651–659. sigler, w.f. & sigler, j.w. 1987. fishes of the great basin: a natural history. reno, nv: university of nevada press. sih, a. 1987. predators and prey lifestyles: an evolutionary and in: sih, a. & kerfoot, c., eds. ecological overview. predation: direct and indirect impacts on aquatic commu- nities. hanover, nh: university of new england, pp. 203– 224. smith, g.r. 1975) fishes of the pliocene glenns ferry formation, southwest idaho. papers on paleontology, uni- versity of michigan museum of paleontology 14: 1–68. smith, r.j.f. 1997. avoiding and deterring predators. in: godin, j.-g.j., ed. behavioural ecology of teleost ﬁshes. oxford: oxford university press, pp. 163–190. tollrian, r. 1995. predator-induced morphological defences: costs, life history shifts, and maternal effects in daphnia pulex. ecology 76: 1691–1705. walser, c.a., belk, m.c. & shiozawa, d.k. 1999. habitat use of leatherside chub (gila copei) in the presence of predatory brown_trout (salmo_trutta). great basin naturalist 59: 272– 277. webb, p.w. 1984. body form, locomotion and foraging in aquatic vertebrates. american zoologist 24: 107–120. wilson, k.w. 1996. habitat characteristics of leatherside chub (gila copei) at two spatial scales. masters thesis. provo, ut: brigham young university. wilson, k.w. & belk, m.c. 2001. habitat characteristics of leatherside chub (gila copei) at two spatial scales. western north american naturalist 61: 36–42. zalewski, m., frankiewicz, p. & brewinska, b. 1985. the factors limiting growth and survival of brown_trout, salmo_trutta m. fario l. introduced to different types of streams. journal of fish biology 27 (suppl. a): 59b73. 463  