ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 2–5 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved copyright ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish conservation and management of the arctic charr: a forward view adams ce, bean cw, fraser d, maitland ps. conservation and management of the arctic charr: a forward view. ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 2–5. ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard abstract – in this study, we synthesised the views of 34 participants in a workshop to consider the status and future conservation and management of the arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus l.). these are expressed as a series of resolutions deriving from a conference on arctic charr conservation held in perth, scotland in june 2004. agreed resolutions from the conference were as follows. (i) the unique diversity of arctic charr should be recognised for the contribution it makes to biodiversity of northern aquatic communities. (ii) the recognition by the public, nongovernmental organisations and national governments of the importance of arctic charr in northern ecosystems is an important step to the management and protection that should be pursued. (iii) the taxonomic status of highly variable charr populations requires to be reviewed. (iv) there should be a separate system, complementary to the taxonomic one, which systematically catalogues the biological diversity of s. alpinus. (v) the arctic charr provides a unique natural resource to study the process of evolution and this requires the highest level of protection from anthropogenic effects. (vi) the status of conservation policy for arctic charr needs to be urgently reviewed to take account of its unique position in the fauna. c. e. adams1, c. w. bean2, d. fraser3, p. s. maitland4 1university field station, institute of biomedical and life sciences, university of glasgow, glasgow, 2scottish natural heritage, caspian house, clydebank business park, clydebank, glasgow, 3english nature, northminster house, peterborough, 4fish conservation centre, gladshot, haddington, uk key words: arctic charr; salvelinus_alpinus; conservation; management c. e. adams, university field station, institute of biomedical and life sciences, university of glasgow, glasgow g63 0aw, scotland, uk; e-mail: c.adams@bio.gla.ac.uk accepted for publication april 13, 2006 introduction methodology it is becoming clear from a growing scientiﬁc literature and particularly from the studies and reviews presen- there is now a clear and ted in this volume that pressing need to formulate a framework for the conservation and management of the arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus) generally, but most particularly within europe. one component of a symposium on the ‘conserva- tion and management of arctic charr’, held in scotland in summer 2004, was a workshop session devoted to pooling and synthesising, both the literature and expert opinion, of the contributing scientists, covering a range of disciplines and specialisms, on the very speciﬁc need for the development of conservation and management policy for the arctic charr. the arguments presented during this workshop are sum- marised here. this exercise was conducted by forming a number of specialist panels, each of which was charged with synthesising expert opinion into a series of resolutions upon which the panel could agree. the four subgroups comprising 34 participants then presented their ﬁnd- ings to a joint meeting of the whole workshop, for comment and amendment of wording, and to agree on joint resolutions. these resolutions and the argument supporting those are presented in this study. workshop outcome resolution 1. the unique diversity of arctic charr should be recognised for the contribution it makes to biodiversity of northern aquatic communities. there is now a very substantive body of evidence that points to the fact that the arctic charr is a species doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00180.x 2 that is unlike most other species (regan 1908). there is a very high degree of between-population variability in its phenotype (behnke 1972; adams & huntingford 2004; adams et al. 2006) and its ecology (klemetsen et al. 1997; fraser et al. 1998; sku´ lason et al. 1999), and recent evidence shows that this is also under- pinned by genetic variation (gislason et al. 1999; klemetsen et al. 2002; westgaard et al. 2004; wilson et al. 2004). at a signiﬁcant number of sites, discrete morphs (differing in phenotype and genotype) occur in sympatry (jonsson & jonsson 2001; klemetsen et al. 2003). ecology, however, this contribution to the diversity of ecosystems containing charr remains ‘hidden’ to all but the specialists who study this species. this is partly because the current taxonomic status of arctic charr does not recognise the extreme variation in phenotype, life history and genotype (kottelat 1997; adams & maitland 2006). but, it is also partly because of the focus of conservation on the protection of species, largely to the exclusion of other potentially important units for conservation (e.g., populations, forms, morphs) (see smith et al. 1993). despite this, it is clear that this signiﬁcant variation does make an important contribution to diversity, both within and between water bodies, in our depauperate northern freshwater fauna. resolution 2. recognition by the public, national governments and nongovernmental organisations of the importance of arctic charr in northern ecosystems is an important step to the management and protection that should be pursued. to achieve this recognition, active promotion by research scientists, naturalists and special interest groups of the special features of this species and its importance is required. there are many ways through which this might be achieved. this species has many of the attributes that make a good ﬂagship species (caro et al. 2004). evidence suggests that arctic charr was the ﬁrst ﬁsh species to re-colonise fresh waters following the last ice age (milner 1987, 1994) and is thus the original aboriginal species and as such, an evocative symbol of the glacial past of northern fresh waters. the bright colouration displayed in many populations also pro- vides a strong visual image. in addition, the arctic charr has characteristics of a good indicator species (saetersdal et al. 2005). it is sensitive to climate change, reduced water quality and the introduction of new species (maitland 1995; igoe et al. 2001) and thus changes to charr populations may act as a general integrator of ecosystem change. in some countries, angling for arctic charr has led to the development of a high proﬁle for this species (maitland 1995), and it is of major importance to many native people living in the arctic. the future of charr conservation resolution 3. the taxonomic status of highly variable charr populations requires to be reviewed. there is now developing evidence that differences between some populations are sufﬁciently substantive that they may be regarded as separate species (kottelat 1997). this is particularly the case for sites where there are populations which are phenotypically and genetically discrete but which live in sympatry. however, it is also likely to apply to other populations as well (kottelat 1997). thus, rigorous application of taxonomic principles may result in the subdivision of s. alpinus into an as-yet unknown number of sister species, some of which may be endemic to very small geographic areas (see, e.g., kottelat 1997 on the s. alpinus forms in thingvallavatn). resolution 4. there should be a separate system, complementary to the taxonomic one, which system- atically of s. alpinus. catalogues biological the diversity any review of the taxonomic status of s. alpinus will take a considerable period of time. however, there is already considerable knowledge of the ecological, phenotypic and genotypic variability in different pop- ulations in the literature held by specialists and natural- ists. a simple system to catalogue this variation could identify the most important populations of charr in the short term, enabling local action for any signiﬁcant population that becomes threatened. this action would be simple, highly effective and low cost and, at least initially, would not require any empirical data collec- tion, merely the accumulation of existing data. in addition, once data have been collected, techniques exist to aid decision making on which populations are more important than others (see bush & adams 2006). resolution 5. the arctic charr provides a unique natural resource to study the process of evolution and this requires the highest level of protection from anthropogenic effects. there are a number of reasons why the arctic charr provide an unparalleled opportunity to examine the mechanisms involved in evolution, one of the most important biological questions of our age. these are: • the degree of variability in form, life history, morphology and behaviour evidenced in the arctic charr is much greater than that in other species (behnke 1972), thus providing a rare opportunity to study ecological processes in- volved in speciation in a common phylogenetic group (sku´ lason et al. 1999). • it has already been established that this variability is partly the result of genetic variation and partly of phenotypic plasticity (nordeng 1983; klemet- sen et al. 2002; adams et al. 2003; adams & huntingford 2004); thus, the role of each in the process of evolution may be studied. 3 adams et al. • key drivers of the process of ecological speci- ation (variation in trophic morphology, feeding behaviour and life history) have all been shown within the arctic charr (sku´ lason et al. 1999; jonsson & jonsson 2001; klemetsen et al. 2003) strongly pointing to this little understood evolu- tionary process as the mechanism behind the diversity in charr. • the simplicity of ﬁsh communities containing charr enables testing of ecological and evolution- ary relationships in a natural arena (sku´ lason et al. 1999). • the process of divergence leading to speciation has progressed to differing stages in different populations of charr, providing unparalleled opportunities for comparative study (adams & huntingford 2004). • conservation of arctic charr habitat (the driving force of its evolution) and charr itself will provide a natural resource for the study of evolution. resolution 6. the status of conservation policy for arctic charr needs to be urgently reviewed to take account of its unique position in the fauna. it is clear that the level of formal conservation status and protection of arctic charr varies across its range. in general, however, its conservation status is relatively low; it is not a red data book species; it is not scheduled in the european union habitats and species directive or in the bern convention (maitland 2004). some minimal local nature legislation protection exists in some countries (e.g., austria and italy) (maitland 1995), but the greatest contribution to protection currently comes through legislation that protects charr habitat, rather than the charr directly and from regula- tion of angling for charr. for example, a small number of uk charr populations are speciﬁcally protected by a habitat protection designation under the uk wildlife and countryside act. another signiﬁcant to pristine charr populations (adams et al. 2006) is through the introduction of different charr strains (leading to loss of unique diversity) and other species, leading to potential competition. there is the need for clariﬁcation of the most appropriate conservation unit for arctic charr; current evidence suggests that this might be populations, but if larger units (perhaps sub- species for example) were identiﬁed, this might provide for broader protection than would be available for populations alone (see resolutions 3 and 4). there is also a need for the development of some generic conservation and management strategies that highlight and identify the speciﬁc needs of this species. threat conclusion it is clear that the arctic charr is highly diverse in all aspects of this its expressed phenotype and that 4 diversity is underpinned by signiﬁcant genetic diver- sity. the current taxonomic status of s. alpinus does not adequately reﬂect this variation. partly as a result, the contribution that arctic charr make to the diversity of species-poor, northern lakes remains ‘hidden’ and undervalued. the recent evolutionary history of the arctic charr makes it an ideal natural model to separate emerging theories on resource- driven evolutionary processes. in addition, thus, we conclude that there is a highly compelling need for the conservation and management of the arctic charr and a very signiﬁcant gap between this need and the level of protection and management that it currently receives. we call upon specialists with research interests in arctic charr, naturalists, conser- vation organisations, ngos and government organi- sations to consider the case summarised here for the promotion of actions which would lead to a formal protection of arctic charr as a unique component of our global heritage. acknowledgements the workshop which derived the resolutions presented here was organised and sponsored by the ec charrnet programme (ec-ct 2001–00007) and by scottish natural heritage, english nature, the royal society of edinburgh and the university of glasgow. a large number of scientists and managers of aquatic ecosystems gave their time to participate in this workshop. we are very grateful for the very signiﬁcant contributions they made to the formation of this paper . skuli sku´ lason and anders klemetsen made signiﬁcant improve- ments to an earlier draft of this paper. references adams, c.e. & huntingford, f.a. 2004. incipient speciation driven by phenotypic plasticity? evidence from sympatric populations of arctic charr. biological journal of the linnean society 81: 611–618. adams, c.e. & maitland, p.s. 2006. arctic charr in britain and ireland – ﬁfteen species or one? ecology of freshwater fish (in press). adams, c.e., woltering, c. & alexander, g. 2003. epigenetic regulation of trophic morphology through feeding behaviour in arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus. biological journal of the linnean society 78: 43–49. adams, c.e., fraser, d., wilson, a.j., alexander, g. & ferguson, m.m. 2006. patterns of phenotypic and genetic variability in the arctic charr show hidden diversity in scottish arctic charr. ecology of freshwater fish (in press). behnke, r.j. 1972. the systematics of salmonid ﬁshes of recently glaciated lakes. journal of the fisheries research board of canada 29: 611–618. bush, v. & adams, c.e. 2006. using phenotypic variation to determine conservation value: application of a novel approach to arctic charr. ecology of freshwater fish (in press). caro, t., engilis, a., fitzherbert, e. & gardner, t. 2004. preliminary assessment of the ﬂagship species concept at a small scale. animal conservation 7: 63–70. fraser, d., adams, c.e. & huntingford, f.a. 1998. trophic polymorphism among arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus l., from loch ericht, scotland. ecology of freshwater fish 7: 184–191. gislason, d., ferguson, m.m., sku´ lason, s. & snorrason, s.s. 1999. rapid and coupled phenotypic and genetic divergence (salvelinus_alpinus). canadian in icelandic arctic charr journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 56: 2229–2234. igoe, f., o’grady, m., byre, c., gargon, p., roche, w. & o’neill, j. 2001. evidence for recent extinctions of two arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus populations in the west of ireland. aquatic conservation: marine and freshwater eco- systems 11: 77–92. jonsson, b. & jonsson, n. 2001. polymorphism and speciation in arctic charr. journal of fish biology 58: 605–638. klemetsen, a., amundsen, p.-a., knudsen, r. & hermansen, b. 1997. a profundal, winter spawning morph of arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus (l.) in lake fjellfrøsvatn, northern norway. nordic journal of freshwater research 73: 13–23. klemetsen, a., elliott, j.m., knudsen, r. & sorensen, p. 2002. evidence for genetic differences in the offspring of two sympatric morphs of arctic charr. journal of fish biology 60: 933–950. klemetsen, a., amundsen, p.-a., dempson, j.b., jonsson, b., jonsson, n., o’connel, m.f. & mortensen, e. 2003. atlantic salmon salmo_salar l., brown_trout salmo_trutta l. and arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus (l.): a review of aspects of their life-histories. ecology of freshwater fish 12: 1–59. kottelat, m. 1997. european freshwater ﬁshes. biologia 52: 1– 271. maitland, p.s. 1995. world status and conservation of arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus (l.). nordic journal of freshwater research 71: 113–127. the future of charr conservation maitland, p.s. 2004. keys to the freshwater ﬁsh of britain and ireland, with notes on their distribution and ecology. scientiﬁc publications of the freshwater biological associ- ation no. 62. ambleside, uk: freshwater biological associ- ation. 248 pp. milner, a.m. 1987. colonization and ecological development of new streams in glacier bay national park, alaska. freshwater biology 18: 53–70. milner, a.m. 1994. colonization and succession of invertebrate communities in a new stream in glacier bay national park, alaska. freshwater biology 32: 387–400. nordeng, h. 1983. solution to the ‘charr problem’ based on arctic charr from norway. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 40: 1372–1387. regan, c.t. 1908. a preliminary revision of the irish charr. annual magazine of natural history 8: 225–234. saetersdal, m., gjerde, i. & blom, h.h. 2005. indicator species inconsistency in nestedness and the problem of spatial patterns. biological conservation 122: 305–316. sku´ lason, s., snorrason, s.s. & jonsson, b. 1999. sympatric morphs, populations and speciation in freshwater ﬁsh with emphasis on arctic charr. in: magurran, a.e. & may, r., eds. evolution of biological diversity. oxford, uk: oxford university press, pp. 70–92. smith, t.b., bruford, m.w. & wayne, r.k. 1993. the preservation of process: the missing element of conservation programs. biodiversity letters 1: 164–167. westgaard, j.i., klemetsen, a. & knudsen, r. 2004. genetic differences between two sympatric morphs of arctic charr conﬁrmed by microsatellite dna. journal of fish biology 65: 1185–1191. wilson, a.j., gı´slason, d., sku´ lason, s., snorrason, s.s., adams, c.e., alexander, g., danzmann, r.g. & ferguson, m.m. 2004. population genetic structure of arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus from northwest europe on large and small spatial scales. molecular ecology 13: 1129–1142. 5  