accepted: 16 august 2016 doi: 10.1111/eff.12309 o r i g i n a l a r t i c l e seasonal effects of macrophyte growth on rainbow trout habitat availability and selection in a low- gradient, groundwater- dominated river zachary j. kuzniar1* | robert w. van kirk2 | eric b. snyder1 1grand valley state university, allendale, mi, usa 2henry’s fork foundation, ashton, id, usa correspondence z. j. kuzniar, grand valley state university, allendale, mi, usa. email: zkuzniar@cygnetenterprises.com present address *cygnet enterprises nw, inc., 104 queens ct., nampa, 83687 id, usa abstract rainbow trout habitat use is often described in high- gradient, runoff- driven, hetero- trophic streams where geomorphic features and overhanging riparian vegetation pro- vide channel complexity and cover. however, many rainbow trout populations thrive in rivers with contrasting aquatic habitat. we describe rainbow trout habitat use in a low- gradient, groundwater- dominated tailwater river where river flow management and macrophyte growth and senescence largely govern available trout habitat. in the summers of 2013 and 2014, available aquatic habitat (depth, velocity, macrophyte cover, substrate size) was quantified, while individual trout location was determined by radio telemetry and linked to environmental variables. detailed habitat surveys in- dicate that macrophyte cover increases throughout the summer and is a strong deter- minant of in- stream habitat characteristics. paired logistic regression shows that adult rainbow trout prefer greater depths. water depth increases with macrophyte abun- dance at both reach and local scales as plants restrict flow, and available trout habitat is linked to this seasonal pattern. when macrophyte abundance is high, adult trout show secondary preference for localised areas of lower macrophyte cover but other- wise show no selectivity for macrophyte cover, velocity or substrate size. results sug- gest that submerged aquatic plants increased the quantity and quality of rainbow trout habitat as a source of channel complexity and cover. macrophytes may play a similar role in other low- gradient streams and should not be overlooked by fisheries managers considering habitat suitability. k e y w o r d s habitat selection, low-gradient rivers, macrophyte, microhabitat, rainbow trout 1 |  introduction quantifying variation in habitat selection of an organism across its geographic distribution is a primary challenge in behavioural ecol- ogy (falke, dunham, jordan, mcnyset, & reeves, 2013). in an aquatic setting, the importance of understanding interactions between fish populations and physical habitat characteristics is widely accepted. developing models to describe these interactions is useful for hab- itat conservation and has been a focus of contemporary fisheries research (dauwalter, wenger, & gardner, 2014). however, the task is particularly difficult for fish such as salmonids, which have com- plex life histories that exhibit temporal and spatial variation in habi- tat use. salmonids tend to form populations distinguishable from one another in behaviour, morphology, physiology and life history across environments (taylor, 1991). rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) is among the most diverse (there are at least nine recognised subspecies; behnke, 2002) and widespread salmonid species in north america (kozfkay, campbell, meyer, & schill, 2011). rainbow trout are capable ecol freshw fish. 2017;26:653–665. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff  |  653 © 2016 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd654  |     of inhabiting a wide range of habitat types that may promote local ad- aptations and increased genetic distance. factors such as variation in stream temperature and habitat can promote microgeographic adap- tation and unique habitat selection within a watershed (taylor, 1991). microhabitat selected by rainbow trout is often described as po- sitions that maximise net energy gain (fausch, 1984) while reducing mortality risk (railsback & harvey, 2002). the use of particular mi- crohabitats can be influenced by a range of environmental conditions including substrate type, overhead and lateral cover, and hydraulic conditions (bisson, sullivan, & nielsen, 1988), as well as changes in food availability (baltz, vondracek, brown, & moyle, 1991). preferred microhabitats are often associated with stream heterogeneity created by geomorphic features (e.g. riffle- pool sequences, cobble- boulder substrate) and various forms of cover such as woody debris and over- hanging riparian vegetation (fausch, 1993; lonzarich & quinn, 1995; raleigh, hickman, solomon, & nelson, 1984; streubel & griffith, 1993), characteristics typical of high- gradient, heterotrophic sys- tems. however, some important rainbow trout fisheries are supported in stream systems that do not exhibit these features. for example, low- gradient, groundwater- dominated streams generally have lower channel complexity and floodplains that are dominated by nonwoody riparian vegetation (bayrd, 2006; jankovsky- jones & bezzerides, 2000; whiting & stamm, 1995), thereby providing less fish habitat in the form of riffle- pool sequences, coarse substrate or woody de- bris. in addition, rivers that flow through arid environments, such as the columbia plateau or arid south- west united states, may deviate from expectations derived from archetypal temperate streams (sensu minshall, 1978) particularly given the lack of significant riparian veg- etation and associated organic matter inputs and shade. submerged macrophytes can be important components of physical complexity in low- gradient streams (hearne & armitage, 1993; vinson, vinson, & angradi, 1992). although the role of macrophytes in providing phys- ical habitat for fish in lentic environments has been well described (collingsworth & kohler, 2010; dibble & pelicice, 2010; figueiredo, mormul, & thomaz, 2015; lopes, cunha, silva, behrend, & gomes, 2015), the role of macrophytes in providing fish habitat in lotic sys- tems has not been widely studied (van kirk & martin, 2000). however, some research has looked at the role of macrophytes as ecosystem engineers—for example organisms that modify their environment to facilitate or constrain the niche availability for other groups of organ- isms (sensu jones, lawton, & shachak, 1994). seasonal macrophyte growth and diversity has been positively correlated with fish diversity, presumably due to habitat complexity (johnson & hering, 2010), and has been shown in many studies to reduce near- bed flow and retain benthic fine particulate organic material (asaeda, rajapakse, & kanoh, 2010; sand- jensen, 1998; zierholz, prosser, fogarty, & rustomji, 2001), as well as influence channel migration via predictable succes- sional properties related to sediment retention and growth form—for example submergent versus emergent (gurnell, 2014). development of microhabitat selection models presents the opportunity to identify and quantify the relative influence of envi- ronmental variables driving rainbow trout habitat use at fine spatial scales. these models typically operate within a use versus availability kuzniar et al. framework, where selection represents greater use of a habitat type than expected based on availability. there are numerous approaches to developing such models (thomas & taylor, 2006), including esti- mating resource selection functions (irwin, rock, & rock, 2012), sam- pling habitat units randomly and estimating occupancy probability as a function of habitat variables (al- chokhachy, wenger, isaak, & kershner, 2013), and using a matched- pairs presence–absence ap- proach (compton, rhymer, & mccollough, 2002). we used microhabitat selection modelling to better understand trout habitat in a low- gradient reach of the henry’s fork of the snake river, idaho, usa, that exhibits a general lack of typical geomorphic channel complexity such as large woody debris dams, significant riffle- pool sequence, and braided channel form. this geomorphic template is in stark contrast to the successful and healthy rainbow trout pop- ulation residing therein, begging the question, how is this population doing so well and supporting a sport fishery that generates tens of millions of dollars in annual revenue (loomis, 2006)? previous research on henry’s fork rainbow trout has focused on factors limiting popu- lation abundance. efforts to increase recruitment have resulted in an extended understanding of juvenile rainbow trout ecology, particularly habitat requirements during winter (gregory, 2000; griffith & smith, 1995; mitro & zale, 2002). this understanding has prompted man- agement actions to increase overwintering habitat and fish passage, thereby increasing recruitment to the fishery (schoby, high, keen, & garren, 2014) and stabilising the population relative to that of pre- vious decades, when hatchery fish substantially contributed to the fishery (van kirk & gamblin, 2000). currently, the upper henry’s fork below island park dam is managed as a wild trout fishery, although hatchery fish from island park reservoir may incidentally supplement the population to a small degree (van kirk & gamblin, 2000). our project sought to focus on the behaviour of the adult pop- ulation, specifically habitat selection of rainbow trout during spring, summer and fall in a low- gradient reach of the river popular with an- glers. the project was timely given the apparent incongruity between the apparent low habitat complexity contrasted with the healthy trout population, a condition that is not uncommon in many other river sys- tems. aside from anecdotal accounts, angradi and contor (1989) pro- vided the only empirical evidence specific to the henry’s fork adult rainbow trout population; however, their results are descriptive and were limited to bankside observations. further research relating hab- itat use to the seasonally available habitat in the river is necessary to advance understanding of the ecology and behaviour of the adult population. the objectives of this study were to (i) quantify available aquatic habitat and describe temporal trends during spring, summer and fall in a low- gradient reach of the river, and (ii) create habitat se- lection models to quantify microhabitat use by adult rainbow trout. 2 |  materials and methods 2.1 | study site the henry’s fork is a fourth- order, groundwater- dominated tribu- tary of the snake river that originates as discharge from large springs kuzniar et al.     |  655 at the base of the yellowstone plateau (benjamin, 2000). the study reach, commonly referred to as the “railroad ranch”, is an 8.5- km stretch of the henry’s fork that lies in harriman state park in fremont county, south- eastern idaho, usa (fig. 1). the railroad ranch is a low- gradient (0.17%; angradi & contor, 1989), high- altitude (1,900 m) reach that flows through the henry’s fork caldera, formed by collapse of a volcanic eruptive centre about 1.3 million years ago (christiansen 2001). discharge is regulated by releases from island park dam, lo- cated about 8 km upstream of the study reach. mean annual discharge at the dam is 18 m3/s. under unregulated conditions, minimum flow, averaging around 13.5 m3/s, would occur in february, while peak discharge, averaging around 34 m3/s, would occur in may. under the regulated flow regime, in which water is stored in fall and win- ter and released for irrigation during the growing season, minimum flow averages 8.2 m3/s and occurs in november, and peak flow averages 37 m3/s and occurs in july (benjamin & van kirk, 1999). unregulated tributaries between the dam and the study reach con- tribute about 5.7 m3/s to flow in the study reach (newfields 2012). the railroad ranch is characterised by a wide (80–200 m) shallow (0.1–2 m) channel, slow water velocities (<0.5 m/s), gravel substrate and minimal overhanging riparian vegetation (jankovsky- jones & bezzerides, 2000; mitro & zale, 2002; newfields 2012). food webs in the railroad ranch are likely driven by autochthonous energy sub- sidies such as seasonal growth of rooted aquatic plants (macrophytes). the most common genera include stuckenia, ranunculus, zannichellia, callitriche, elodea, potamogeton and myriophyllum (henry, 2010). 2.2 | habitat survey three surveys per year (2013 and 2014) were conducted to capture temporal trends of in- stream habitat within the study reach. early- season surveys were conducted in early to mid- june, mid- season surveys were conducted in late july, and late- season surveys were conducted in late september. water depth (m), temperature (°c), dis- solved oxygen concentration (mg/l), velocity (m/s), macrophyte cover (%) and substrate size (mm) were measured at 152 sites during each figure 1 map of study area, showing location of random sampling locations used in habitat surveys 656  |     habitat survey. site locations were chosen by generating random co- ordinates along the longitudinal (upstream to downstream) and lateral (bank to bank) axes of the stream reach (fig. 1). habitat variables were assessed at the same site locations during each of the six surveys. at each site, habitat- variable measurements were taken arbitrarily within 1 m (in any direction) of the fixed site location. water- column tem- perature and dissolved oxygen were measured with a ysi model 550a portable probe (ysi inc., yellow springs, oh, usa). velocity was meas- ured at 2/10 and 8/10 of total depth with a marsh mcbirney model 2000 meter (hach company, loveland, co, usa), and the two values were averaged. macrophyte cover was estimated as the proportion of a 0.30- m- squared viewing area occupied by aquatic vascular plants using a quadrat- inscribed underwater viewing box. cover estimates were taken at three random locations per site and averaged. to quan- tify substrate size, an aggregate grab sample was collected from the stream bed at each site using a square- point shovel. a minimum of fifty particles were selected from each grab sample and grouped into size categories by length of longest axis using a gravelometer (part number 14- d40, wildlife supply company, yulee, fl, usa). the median length of the sample of particles was used in subsequent analyses. stream flow was measured as discharge from island park reservoir at usgs gauging station #13042500 on each sampling date. in 2014, we deployed a ysi model exo2 multiparameter sonde (ysi inc., yellow springs, oh, usa) that recorded dissolved oxygen and water temperature at 15- min intervals throughout the study period. for logistical reasons, the sonde was located 5 km downstream of the bottom of the study reach but in a reach of river similar in morphology to and contiguous with the study reach. 2.3 | tagging because the stream channel in the study reach is very wide and shal- low and contains little physical habitat structure, random observa- tion of fish in their preferred habitat locations was not feasible via traditional methods such as snorkelling or electrofishing (angradi & contor, 1989; schoby, high, keen, & garren, 2010). angradi and contor (1989) were able to locate surface- feeding fish from the bank, but we wanted to be able to observe fish regardless of whether they were feeding on the surface or visible from the bank. thus, we used radio telemetry to locate individual fish for the purpose of observing their microscale habitat selection. rainbow trout were captured during may of 2013 by electrofishing and angling; all captures during may of 2014 were by angling. once captured, trout were weighed to the nearest gram and measured to the nearest millimetre (total length) to determine suitability for radio tag implantation. only trout with a mass of at least 466 grams were implanted to prevent the transmitter from exceeding 3% of fish body weight (brown, steven, anderson, & mckinley, 1999). sixty- seven trout were implanted with ats f1835 trailing- whip radio transmitters (advanced telemetry systems, isanti, mn, usa) throughout the study, 40 in 2013 and 27 in 2014. prior to surgery, study fish were placed in a 15- gallon tub filled with river water containing ≤80 mg/l (concen- tration of anaesthetic was adjusted based on water temperature) of kuzniar et al. tricaine methanesulfonate (western chemical, ferndale, wa, usa). after the trout lost equilibrium, tags were surgically implanted ventrally, approximately one inch anterior to the pelvic girdle using the shielded needle technique developed by ross and kleiner (1982). three absorb- able sutures were placed to close the incision. all surgical instruments were disinfected pre- and postsurgery to avoid infection. time elapsed for each surgery was <4 min. trout were placed either in a flow- through recovery enclosure or held in- stream postsurgery to regain equilibrium before being released at the capture location. methods for tag implan- tation were approved by grand valley state university’s institutional animal care and use committee (project number 14- 09- a) and by idaho department of fish and game (permit number f- 13- 13- 14). 2.4 | observation of fish habitat selection implanted trout were tracked by radio telemetry on weekdays from june to august of 2013 and 2014. the study reach was divided into five subsections, and the location of tracking on each day within a given week was determined by a random permutation of the five sub- sections. as the observed trout exhibited high site fidelity, most fish were located only once per week. visual confirmation of a trout’s lo- cation (hereafter, focal point) was obtained for approximately 50 per cent of total locations. if an individual could not be seen due to tur- bidity or depth, the focal point was estimated. true focal points were determined to be within a 1 m radius area of focal point estimations through field observations and experimentation with hidden tags. if we deemed trout behaviour to be altered by the presence of field workers before an accurate location was determined, we abandoned attempts to observe the focal point. a microscale survey was conducted following the location of each individual and included assessment of habitat at a matched pair of lo- cations: (i) the point occupied by the fish (fish focal point), and (ii) a ran- dom point that was available but not occupied (paired point). locations of paired points were derived relative to focal point location using a coordinate system of random distances and directions. random dis- tances were bound within a range of 6–12 m, while random directions were selected from the entire range of 0°–365°. the distance criterion was developed empirically through field observations to represent a paired point that was readily accessible to the located trout, but was unoccupied at the time of observation. depth, temperature, dissolved oxygen, velocity, macrophyte cover and substrate size were measured at both the fish focal point and the random, unoccupied point, using the habitat survey site procedure mentioned above. 2.5 | statistical analyses to provide full details of all of our statistical methods and justification for our conclusions without detracting from readability of the manu- script, we have included all statistical details in a supporting document that is available online from the publisher. tables and figures in that document are identified with the prefix “s” for reference. throughout this manuscript and the supporting document, the notation “x×y” re- fers to the interaction (product) of variables x and y in a statistical kuzniar et al. model, and the notation “x:y” refers to all factorial combinations of categorical groups in x with categorical groups in y. we performed all statistical analyses in r version 3.2.2 (r core team 2015). we assessed macroscale variability in habitat conditions with two- way analysis of variance (anova), testing for differences in mean hab- itat characteristics across seasons (early, mid and late) and years (2013, 2014). sample site was included as a random effect to control for vari- ability across sites. because we performed anova for each of the six habitat variables, we adjusted the individual- test level of significance using bonferroni’s correction to obtain a six- test family error rate of α = .05. to meet model assumptions, transformations were required for macrophyte cover (arcsine square root) and median substrate par- ticle size (square root). based on the results of this analysis, we treated the means of the habitat variables within the six season:year groups as a sample of six independent macroscale observations and tested for significant pairwise pearson correlations between macrophyte cover and dissolved oxygen, depth, velocity and substrate particle size. we used bonferroni’s correction to adjust the level of significance to ob- tain a four- test family error rate of α = .05. for modelling dependence of physical habitat conditions on macro- phyte cover and physical covariates such as stream flow, and for mod- elling microscale fish habitat selection, we used multimodel inference based on akaike’s information criterion with sample size correction (aicc), which is standard in current ecological research (e.g. hutchins, engel, nowlin, & schwartz, 2016; kuehne & olden, 2016; lindeman, grant, & desjardins, 2014). we use the approach of burnham and anderson (2002), which is to propose a set of physically and biologically plausible candidate models, to calculate model weights based on aicc and then use the aicc weights to infer evidence for relative strength of the predictor variables and calculate model- averaged coefficient estimates and standard errors (claeskens & hjort, 2008). we are fully aware of criticisms of this approach, of other statistical methods that could be used and of broader philosophical and technical discussions regarding appropriate use of p- values, aicc and bayesian approaches in science (see e.g. dennis, 1996; pawatin, 2001; bolker, 2008; stauffer, 2008; murtaugh, 2014 and the large number of internet chat discus- sions that can be found with a quick search). however, we believe that the evidence- based approach of multimodel inference was appropriate for use in the modelling analyses performed in this study. details of the analyses and their interpretation are given in the data s1. the abundance of macrophytes was presumed to be a driving force behind microscale (i.e. within- season) patterns in habitat variables. we tested this hypothesis through mixed- effects linear models of depth, velocity and substrate particle size as respective responses and mac- rophyte cover as a predictor. because temperature and dissolved ox- ygen exhibited strong daily cycles and therefore varied more within a sampling day than across sites or seasons (fig. 2), neither of these vari- ables was used as either a response or predictor in the microscale hab- itat modelling. season:year was included as a random effect to account for variation across the six season:year groups. within- group spatial autocorrelation across sampling sites was modelled with an exponen- tial autocorrelation structure. flow was also used as a fixed-effects predictor (fig. 3). flow was included as a covariate in every model for     |  657 figure 2 time series of water temperature and dissolved oxygen during the study period in 2014. bottom panel shows expanded view of 1 week to better illustrate daily cycles figure 3 discharge from island park dam during the study period in each year the velocity response, and velocity was included in every model for substrate particle size. in addition to these covariates and macrophyte cover as predictors, depth was considered as a potential predictor for both velocity and substrate particle size. all additive and interactive combinations of the predictors were fit, resulting in five candidate models for depth and thirteen each for velocity and substrate size. habitat selection was modelled using conditional, matched- pairs logistic regression, using velocity, depth, macrophyte cover and sub- strate particle size as potential predictors of fish location. standard (unconditional) logistic regression is appropriate for habitat- preference studies only when randomly sampled habitat units can be classified as occupied or unoccupied (e.g. al- chokhachy et al., 2013) or when in- dependent random samples of occupied and unoccupied habitat can be made (thomas & taylor, 2006). as noted above, we were unable to observe presence or absence of fish in a random sample of habitat units but instead could observe fish only upon relocation with radio telemetry. therefore, observations of presence–absence were made in dependent pairs, conditioned upon having located a fish. in this de- sign, conditional, matched- pairs logistic regression is more appropri- ate than standard logistic regression (compton et al., 2002; hosmer & lemeshow, 1989). this type of analysis has been widely used in 658  |     case–control studies of rare diseases in epidemiology but is equally applicable to matched- pairs (presence = “case”, absence = “control”) habitat selection data (ormsbee & mccomb, 1998). the response variable in matched- pairs logistic regression is a change in loge- odds of organism presence per unit change in a given predictor variable. each habitat observation is expressed as the difference in a particular habitat- variable measurement between the focal point and the nearby random, unoccupied point. matched- pairs logistic regression models are fit without an intercept, so only relative odds, and not absolute odds or probabilities, can be calculated (data s1). a total of 58 pairs of observations were made on 48 individual fish, 24 in each year. because of the relatively small number of indi- vidual fish, which serve as grouping variables in the conditional logistic regression model, we did not want to propose every possible model that could be constructed with four habitat variables and all year- interaction terms. based on preliminary analysis of paired differences in the habitat variables, we proposed a set of 16 candidate models that focused on depth, macrophyte cover and substrate particle size as predictors but also included velocity in a few models. given observed large differences in mid- season macrophyte cover between years and strong negative association between macrophyte cover and substrate size, the candidate set included models in which preference for mac- rophyte cover and substrate size differed between years. the paired differences of habitat- variable measurements had symmetric distribu- tions, so no data transformations were required. the logistic regression analysis identified depth as the only habitat variable strongly preferred by trout. we tested for dependence of the depth preference as a function of time by fitting a single mixed- effects linear regression model to the depth- preference data for all fish that were located at least four times within a year. this set consisted of 11 fish, all located during 2014. we used a t- test for significance of the time coefficient in the regression model. 3 |  results 3.1 | macroscale habitat variability each of the six habitat variables differed significantly in mean across seasons (p < .0001 for each response), and the mean of all variables except dissolved oxygen (p = .072) and macrophyte cover (p = .80) differed across years (p < .007 for the other four variables; table s1). the season × year interaction effect was significant for all six variables (p < .0001 for each response; fig. 4; table s1). these re- sults indicated that the six season:year time periods during which habitat characteristics were measured formed a set of six independ- ent habitat conditions. over this set of six season:year means, mac- rophyte cover was significantly correlated with dissolved oxygen (r = .91, p = .010) but was not significantly correlated with depth (r = .83, p = .038), velocity (r = −.42, p = .416) or particle size (r = −.79, p = .061) at the bonferroni- adjusted error rate (table s2). however, the correlation coefficients relating macrophyte cover to depth and particle size were large in magnitude and would likely be significant with larger sample size. kuzniar et al. figure 4 interaction plot of each of the six habitat variables across season and year. points are means over all sampling locations; error bars depict 95% confidence interval around each mean trends in depth and water temperature were similar in 2013 and 2014, increasing from june to july followed by a decrease from july to september, but differences across years reflected a warmer and sun- nier early season in 2013 and a warmer and sunnier autumn in 2014 (fig. 4). median particle size and dissolved oxygen concentrations also showed similar trends both years, decreasing and increasing through the seasons, respectively. in 2013, macrophyte cover increased from june to july followed by a decrease from july to september; however, cover increased during each survey in 2014. inversely, water veloci- ties sequentially declined in 2013 and, in 2014, increased from june to july followed by a september decrease. water depth and velocity largely reflected river flow, which was higher in 2013 over the entire study period except for late september, when flows were the same be- tween years (fig. 3). however, depth was significantly greater during late- season 2014, even though river flow was the same between years, presumably because of higher macrophyte cover during 2014. dissolved oxygen did not reflect either temperature or flow patterns but was strongly correlated with macrophyte cover. 3.2 | microscale habitat variability the multimodel inference provided strong evidence that depth, veloc- ity and median particle size were all strongly affected by macrophyte cover, even after accounting for the significant season:year variability described above (table 1, fig. 5, details in data s1). depth was strongly and positively predicted by macrophyte cover and stream flow, and kuzniar et al.     |  659 table 1 model- averaged coefficient estimates (̂β) and ratio of coefficient estimate to standard error (̂β∕se) for each of the three microscale habitat response variables. notation “x×y” indicates interaction (product) of variables x and y. na entry indicates that the particular predictor was not included in any of the candidate models for that response. blank cell indicates that the predictor was included in candidate- model set but did not appear in any models with nonzero weight. see data s1 for details response depth (m) ̂β 0.112 0.00680 na na 0.000715 na na na na predictor asin (√mac. cover) flow (m3/s) depth (m) velocity (m/s) asin (√mac. cover) × flow asin (√mac. cover) × depth asin (√mac. cover) × velocity depth × flow depth × velocity ̂β∕se 3.60 3.66 0.68 velocity (m/s) √particle size (mm) ̂β −0.0853 0.00446 0.261 na 0.000511 −0.159 na ̂β∕se −2.71 3.56 3.90 0.61 −2.71 0.000185 0.32 na ̂β −0.361 na −0.780 1.48 na 0.402 na −0.0947 ̂β∕se −2.89 −4.62 5.15 1.27 0.22 negatively on macrophyte cover. the negative effect of macrophyte cover on velocity was stronger as depth increased (negative macro- phyte cover × depth interaction term). substrate particle size was most strongly predicted by macrophyte cover, depth and velocity (tables 1, s7 and s8). substrate size was an increasing function of velocity and a decreasing function of macrophyte cover and depth. the multimodel inference provided moderate evidence that the negative effect of macrophyte cover on substrate size was reduced at higher velocities (positive macrophyte cover × velocity interaction term). 3.3 | fish habitat selection thirty- six of the 40 rainbow trout implanted with tags in 2013 were re- located postsurgery during 2013. eleven tags were recovered from the river in the fall of 2013, winter of 2013/2014 or spring of 2014 during periodic off- season monitoring surveys, presumably expelled following mortality due to predation, winter conditions or age. the 11 recovered tags, along with 16 new tags, were implanted into different individuals at the beginning of the 2014 field season. eighteen of the 27 rainbow trout implanted with tags in 2014 were relocated postsurgery during 2014. an additional eight rainbow trout, implanted with tags in 2013, were relocated during the 2014 field season. focal point surveys were conducted for 24 different rainbow trout during each year, including 41 rainbow trout locations during 2013 and 65 locations in 2014. as a matched- pairs design was employed to determine habitat se- lection, we analysed the differences between habitat measurements at focal and paired points rather than absolute measurements taken in the field (fig. 6). depth and velocity differences were similar between years; the mean depth difference was positive, and the mean velocity difference was near zero. in 2013, the mean difference in macrophyte cover was negative but that for substrate particle size was positive; however, the inverse was true for 2014. as differences in macrophyte figure 5 microscale (within seasons and years) dependence of depth, velocity and substrate particle size as a function of macrophyte cover. other model predictors were fixed at their mean values to generate the univariate curves shown here there was some evidence from the multimodel analysis that the effect of macrophyte cover on depth increased with stream flow (tables 1 and s4). macrophyte cover, stream flow, depth and macrophyte cover × depth interaction were all strong predictors of velocity (tables 1, s5 and s6). velocity depended positively on stream flow and depth and 660  |     kuzniar et al. table 2 model- averaged coefficient estimates (̂β), ratio of coefficient estimate to standard error (̂β∕se) and relative odds (exp ( ̂β)) for logistic regression models predicting local fish presence. notation “x:y” indicates effect of variable x in year y. relative odds are change in odds of fish presence per unit change in the predictor variable in the vicinity of observed fish locations. relative odds >1 indicate greater probability of fish presence; relative odds <1 indicate lower probability of fish presence predictor depth (m) macrophyte cover:2013 (%) macrophyte cover:2014 (%) particle size:2013 (mm) particle size:2014 (mm) ̂β 2.887 −0.024 0.007 0.257 −0.006 ̂β∕se 3.45 −1.49 0.97 0.72 −0.22 relative odds 17.9 0.976 1.293 1.007 0.994 figure 6 box plots of paired differences (fish focal point– random point) for each fish relocation observation. values near zero indicate no preference; positive values indicate preference for a larger value of the particular habitat characteristic; negative values indicate preference against a larger value. vertical axis is truncated in the particle- size plots so that the boxes and whiskers are clearly visible; as a result, a few outlying observations are not depicted cover and substrate size changed sign between years but velocity and depth remained constant, there was reason to believe that rain- bow trout preference would reflect these patterns. thus, we included year- interaction terms for macrophyte cover and particle size in the candidate set of logistic regression models, but we did not include year- interaction terms for velocity and depth. the aicc analysis provided strong evidence that fish prefer greater water depths (tables 2, s9 and s10; fig. 7), and the linear regression showed that depth preference did not change significantly over time across the 11 fish observed multiple times in 2014 (p = .132; fig. s1). there was moderately strong evidence that fish presence was associ- ated with changes in macrophyte cover and substrate particle size, but only when the effect of these variables was allowed to vary between years (tables 2 and s10). in 2013, the relative odds of fish presence decreased with increasing macrophyte cover (table 2; fig. 7), whereas in 2014, the odds of fish presence increased with increasing macro- phyte cover but only very weakly (table 2; fig. 7). in 2013, odds of fish presence very slightly increased with increasing substrate size, but in 2014, odds of fish presence were essentially unaffected by substrate size. there was no evidence that fish selected for velocity. 4 |  discussion the henry’s fork exhibits significant annual and seasonal changes in trout habitat, most notably the growth of aquatic plants during the figure 7 relative odds of fish presence as a function of changes in depth and macrophyte cover over spatial scales of <12 m. horizontal axis is change in depth; different line types indicate changes in macrophyte cover. relative odds >1 indicate greater probability of fish presence; relative odds <1 indicate lower probability of fish presence. horizontal line at odds = 1 is shown for reference summer season. habitat selection by adult rainbow trout appears to be based on a complex array of environmental factors linked by the ecosystem engineering effects of seasonal macrophyte growth. 4.1 | macro- and microscale habitat availability surveys of in- stream habitat on the henry’s fork have been con- ducted in the past, most often associated with conservation efforts by the henry’s fork foundation. different sampling methods make comparisons with historical records difficult, but it seems that habi- tat conditions determined in this study are comparable with previous results. angradi and contor (1989) measured water temperature and dissolved oxygen levels at three sites within the railroad ranch reach of the henry’s fork in august 1986. average temperature among all sites was 17°c, and average dissolved oxygen concentration was 14 mg/l. these results are within approximately 2°c and 3 mg/l of mean temperature (19°c) and dissolved oxygen (11 mg/l) measure- ments taken during the late july (the most comparable season) habi- tat survey. submerged aquatic macrophytes have been sampled by kuzniar et al. multiple parties since 1958 (angradi, 1991; henry, 2010; snyder, 1991; vinson et al., 1992), often to assess winter habitat conditions and food resources for trumpeter swans (cygnus buccinator). most recently, henry (2010) quantified percent macrophyte cover during october of 2009 at various sites throughout the railroad ranch reach. estimated mean cover was 64%, which is similar to the pooled june, july and september mean cover during our 2013 and 2014 habitat surveys (59%). henry (2010) also quantified water velocity and sub- strate size at macrophyte sampling sites in 2009, reporting a mean water velocity of ~0.24 m/s, which is what we measured during our september habitat surveys in 2013 and 2014 (0.25 m/s). gravel sub- strates (2.1–64 mm diameter) dominated most sites observed by henry (2010), corroborating mean particle sizes found in this study during september of 2013 (6.81 mm) and 2014 (7.17 mm). the proliferation of aquatic macrophytes is common in autotro- phic streams (watson, 1987) and can produce significantly different riverine habitat than unvegetated reaches (gregg & rose, 1982). results from detailed habitat surveys suggest that temporal trends in dissolved oxygen, velocity, depth and substrate size are driven by aquatic plant growth. dissolved oxygen concentration shows an increasing trend throughout each sampling day, peaking just before sunset (fig. 2), and this effect was greatest during july of both 2013 and 2014. these patterns are contrary to those observed in less pro- ductive systems, where physical processes such as turbulent reaera- tion and temperature control dissolved oxygen levels more than plant respiration (jones & mulholland, 2000). similar results to those in this study have been described in other unshaded, relatively nutrient- rich streams. for example, desmet et al. (2011) reported high dissolved oxygen concentrations coinciding with high solar irradiance levels for the nete river in belgium. they concluded that photosynthetic ac- tivity by macrophytes drove the oxygen dynamics. the high diurnal oxygen amplitudes and low nocturnal minima we observed during mid- summer also mirrored daily maximum and minimum water tem- peratures, likely a product of diel oxygen production and consumption by macrophytes. the establishment of dense aquatic plant stands during the sum- mer season influences water depth and velocity through displacement and mechanical impediment of flow—again acting as ecological engi- neers. depth in the henry’s fork was partially influenced by discharge from island park reservoir, but this flow effect was constant across all seasons. flow- adjusted depths during both years were significantly greater in september at lower flows (450 cfs) than in either june (450– 1,000 cfs) or july (1,200–1,650 cfs) during higher flows (u.s. geological survey 2012). mixed- effects linear modelling suggests depth was pos- itively related to macrophyte abundance. after accounting for flow, water depth increased an average of 1.12 cm per 10% increase in macrophyte cover over the duration of the study. macrophyte abun- dance was negatively correlated with water velocity, which was lowest during the september surveys both years, when macrophyte stands were near their peak. after accounting for flow and depth, water ve- locity was an average of 0.85 m/s lower per 10% increase in macro- phyte cover. macrophyte growth has been found to increase depth and decrease velocities through hydraulic resistance in river systems,     |  661 including the henry’s fork (cotton, wharton, bass, heppell, & wotton, 2006; hearne & armitage, 1993; vinson et al., 1992). once established, low- energy environments created in and around macrophyte patches are conducive to retention of fine mineral and organic matter (cotton et al., 2006; gregg & rose, 1982; hearne & armitage, 1993; madsen, chambers, james, koch, & westlake, 2001; sand- jensen, 1998) that contain nutrients needed for growth and reproduction, and thus further persistence, of macrophytes (henry, 2010). this positive feedback mechanism likely lead to macro- and mi- croscale trends in median particle size observed in this study. during both years, median particle size decreased as macrophyte abundance increased through seasons. within seasons, particle size was nega- tively dependent on macrophyte cover; in particular, this relationship held during the early season of both years, when macrophyte abun- dance was minimal. this suggests that areas where macrophytes per- sisted through the winter were also areas with finer substrates. 4.2 | microhabitat selection during both years, rainbow trout showed the strongest preference for greater depths (i.e. deeper water than expected based on avail- able habitat) regardless of other habitat conditions. at mean mac- rophyte cover, the relative odds of trout presence were 1.3 times higher for every 0.1 m increase in depth. selection for greater focal depths has been previously documented for the species (baltz et al., 1991; dauwalter et al., 2014; streubel & griffith, 1993; vondracek & longanecker, 1993) and is often associated with thermal or ener- getic optimisation or predation risk. the use of deep- water habitats has been shown to correlate with behavioural thermoregulation (baird & krueger, 2003; matthews & berg, 1997), especially in streams that approach lethal temperature limits (>25°c, bidgood & berst, 1969). although temperature can be a determinant of trout distributions (baltz et al., 1991; cech, mitchell, castleberry, & mcenroe, 1990), mean daily water temperature in the railroad ranch reach of the henry’s fork never exceeded 20°c during our study; therefore, it is unlikely that rainbow trout were selecting greater depths due to ther- mal stress. fausch (1984) suggests that salmonids select focal points that will maximise net energy gain (i.e. balance feeding potential with cost of maintaining position). this often involves a trade- off between choos- ing higher-velocity focal positions that carry many food items or lower- velocity positions that require less metabolic expenditure (vondracek & longanecker, 1993). under this hypothesis, water velocity would be expected to explain significant variation in focal location response. as velocity was not a predictor of rainbow trout location, and habitat modelling suggested velocities were positively related to water depth, we suspect that rainbow trout were not selecting locations of greater depth to minimise the energetic costs associated with swimming and/ or holding. however, this does not eliminate the possibility that trout were selecting locations to maximise energy budgets, as food availabil- ity (e.g. drifting macroinvertebrates) was not quantified at focal points. behaviour and habitat use of trout can be altered by the pres- ence of avian predators (mather, 1998). rainbow trout have been 662  |     documented as important prey for piscivorous birds (kennedy, gale, & ostrand, 2006; lovvorn, yule, & derby, 1999), and laboratory studies on rainbow trout suggested that an attack by, or sighting of, an avian predator elicit risk- avoidance behaviour (angradi, 1992). the potential for avian predation may increase as fish grow larger and more con- spicuous (harvey & stewart, 1991; power, 1987). this may partially explain why stream salmonids tend to occupy deeper water as they increase in size (lonzarich & quinn, 1995). although the prevalence of piscivory by birds has never been quantified in the henry’s fork, meyer et al. (2016) suggest predation rates by piscivorous birds on catchable- sized stocked rainbow trout can be relatively high (>25%) in southern idaho waters. the railroad ranch reach, characterised by a wide channel (100–200 m), shallow water (<1 m), sand/gravel sub- strate and minimal riparian vegetation, offers little overhead cover for resident trout (mitro & zale, 2002). this information suggests the risk of avian predation could drive the adult rainbow trout’s strong pref- erence for greater depths, which afford cover from avian predators. along with the primary depth preference, rainbow trout showed secondary preference for lower macrophyte cover and larger stream bed particle sizes in 2013. macrophytes can have direct and indirect ef- fects on rainbow trout. presence of macrophytes at the reach scale in- creases abundance of the most important food source for henry’s fork rainbow trout by providing habitat and offering shelter and substrate for colonisation of macroinvertebrates (angradi & griffith, 1990; gregg & rose, 1982). although macrophytes increase invertebrate density, a high abundance of aquatic plants can lead to decreased foraging suc- cess in the interior of macrophyte beds (van kirk & martin, 2000); however, it has been shown that bed edges provide increased forag- ing opportunities for stream fishes because of high manoeuverability and visibility, while still offering cover (trebitz & nebbelink, 1996). the decreased feeding ability within macrophyte stands coupled with the optimal foraging locations provided by “bed- edge” habitats may ex- plain the avoidance response observed in 2013, when the channel was partitioned into a braided network due to high macrophyte abundance (82%). by avoiding congested interior bed areas, trout could have in- creased foraging efficiency in open channels adjacent to beds that of- fered cover and a directed flow of drifting benthos. in the henry’s fork, macrophytes take root in fine sediments and grow into dense stands throughout the spring/summer before se- nescing in the fall and winter. during periods of high abundance, the plants trap fine sediments and slow water velocity (barko, gunnison, & carpenter, 1991; gregg & rose, 1982), creating depositional areas in the stream bed. this positive feedback, leading to a negative as- sociation between local macrophyte abundance and substrate size, may explain the apparent particle- size preference observed in 2013. as rainbow trout selected locations with relatively low macrophyte cover, it is reasonable that those locations had higher median particle size, because particle size was negatively associated with macrophyte cover. multimodel inference predicting rainbow trout habitat selec- tion suggests that macrophyte cover is more strongly selected for than substrate size, providing more evidence that the association between fish presence and particle size may be an incidental consequence of the negative association between macrophyte cover and particle size. kuzniar et al. the logistic regression analysis suggested little preference for or against macrophyte cover in 2014. macrophyte cover was approxi- mately 65% during the mid- season survey of 2014, which most ac- curately represents the conditions experienced by trout during the focal point surveys (i.e. 69% of focal point surveys in 2014 occurred during july). we suggest that macrophyte cover in 2014 was not so scarce as to be actively sought out by fish seeking cover, but also not abundant enough to elicit the same avoidance response as observed in 2013. therefore, we hypothesise that adult rainbow trout preference for macrophyte cover has an inverse relationship with mean summer macrophyte abundance in the railroad ranch; as macrophyte cover increases, preference for greater amounts of macrophyte cover de- creases. within each growing season, this trend may also be subject to an ecological threshold (i.e. once macrophyte biomass reaches a critical level, preference for/against macrophytes may invert). 4.3 | macrophytes, physical habitat and rainbow trout the henry’s fork in island park, like other mid- order spring fed and tailwater rivers located in dry climates, exhibits lower channel com- plexity than runoff- dominated rivers. large width- to- depth ratios, low gradient, relatively narrow range of flows and floodplains domi- nated by sedges and grasses rather than woody riparian vegetation contribute to the lack of physical habitat features common to runoff- dominated, temperate systems (whiting & stamm 1995). however, submerged vegetation can be an important component of channel complexity in low- gradient streams, contributing to the quantity and quality of available habitats (hearne & armitage, 1993; henry, 2010; vinson et al., 1992). seasonal growth and die- back of macrophytes have been shown to create heterogeneous distributions of flow and substrate, dynamic in time and space, which increase in- stream diver- sity important for river biota (cotton et al., 2006). habitat variables selected by adult rainbow trout in this study (i.e. depth, macrophyte cover, median particle size) were all found to be directly related to macrophyte abundance. due to the matched- pairs study design, it was not possible to determine optimal habitat conditions for these fish; however, it was clear that habitat use during the spring, summer and fall was reflective of seasonally available stream characteristics that are greatly influenced by the growth of aquatic plants. we believe these results are applicable to many other arid, groundwater- based rivers and that the importance of aquatic macrophytes as ecosystem engineers cannot be overemphasised. 4.4 | management implications the henry’s fork is a dynamic system that exhibits significant sea- sonal changes in trout habitat and selection. this study provides eco- logical information regarding adult rainbow trout habitat selection that will allow fisheries managers to make better informed decisions. results of microhabitat modelling and detailed habitat surveys sug- gest water depth and seasonal macrophyte abundance are impor- tant determinants of trout location and stream habitat complexity. kuzniar et al. although some factors governing river depth and macrophyte growth cannot be controlled (e.g. weather), we know that flow management at island park dam can affect downstream turbidity, sediment export, nutrient export and water levels. although other river uses such as irrigation demand and hydroelectric power generation have greater influence over the nature of reservoir releases, fisheries managers and advocates have some influence. results of this study segue into cur- rent research aimed at quantifying dependence of aquatic productiv- ity downstream on reservoir management and climate so that in the future, we can predict response of macrophytes to management ac- tions and climatic conditions. acknowledgements funding for this project was provided by the henry’s fork foundation and grand valley state university. special thanks to henry’s fork foundation staff, interns and membership; graduate committee mem- bers eric snyder, rob van kirk and mark luttenton; harriman state park staff; idaho fish & game. the study area map was created by rod denning of the annis water resource institute at grand valley state university. we also thank dr. ted angradi and one other anonymous reviewer for their thoughtful revisions to the manuscript. references al-chokhachy, r., wenger, s. j., isaak, d. j., & kershner, j. l. (2013). characterizing the thermal suitability of instream habitat for salmonids: a cautionary example from the rocky mountains. transactions of the american fisheries society, 142, 793–801. angradi, t. r. (1991). transport of particulate organic matter in an idaho river, usa. hydrobiologia, 211, 171–183. angradi, t. r. (1992). effects of predation risk on foraging behavior of juve- nile rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss). canadian journal of zoology., 70, 355–360. angradi, t., & contor, c. (1989). henry’s fork fisheries investigations. job completion report for 1986-1987, project no. f-71-r-12, subproject iii, jobs 7a and 7b. idaho department of fish and game. available at: https://collaboration.idfg.idaho.gov/fisheriestechnicalreports/res- angradi1988%20henrys%20fork%20fisheries%20investigations.pdf. accessed july 10, 2016. angradi, t. r., & griffith, j. s. (1990). diel feeding chronology and diet se- lection of rainbow trout (onchorhynchus mykiss) in the henry’s fork of the snake river, idaho. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 47, 199–209. asaeda, t., rajapakse, l., & kanoh, m. (2010). fine sediment retention as affected by annual shoot collapse: sparganium erectum as an ecosys- tem engineer in a lowland stream. river research and applications, 26, 1153–1169. baird, o. e., & krueger, c. c. (2003). behavioral thermoregulation of brook and rainbow trout: comparison of summer habitat use in an adirondack river, new york. transactions of the american fisheries society, 132, 1194–1206. baltz, d. m., vondracek, b., brown, l. r., & moyle, p. b. (1991). seasonal changes in microhabitat selection by rainbow trout in a small stream. transactions of the american fisheries society, 120, 166–176. barko, j. w., gunnison, d., & carpenter, s. r. (1991). sediment interactions with submersed macrophyte growth and community dynamics. aquatic botany, 41, 41–65. bayrd, g. b. (2006). the influences of geology and water management on hydrol- ogy and fluvial geomorphology in the henry’s fork of the snake river, eastern     |  663 idaho and western wyoming. m.s. thesis, department of geosciences, idaho state university, pocatello, id. available at: http://eds.b.ebscohost. com/eds/detail/detail?vid=1&sid=c3a3e568-95a7-4485-8c13-a0b- ca637bbf9%40sessionmgr102&hid=120&bdata=jnnpdgu9zwr- zlwxpdmu%3d#an=isu.819519&db=cat03172a. accessed july 10, 2016. behnke, r. j. (2002). trout and salmon of north america. new york, ny: chanticleer press inc.. 359 pp. benjamin, l. (2000). groundwater hydrology of the henry’s fork springs. intermountain journal of sciences, 6, 119–142. benjamin, l., & van kirk, r. w. (1999). assessing instream flows and reser- voir operations on an eastern idaho river. journal of the american water resources association, 35, 899–909. bidgood, b. e., & berst, a. h. (1969). lethal temperatures for great lakes rainbow trout. journal of the fisheries research board of canada, 26, 456–459. bisson, p. a., sullivan, k., & nielsen, j. l. (1988). channel hydraulics, habitat use, and body form of juvenile coho salmon, steelhead, and cutthroat trout in streams. transactions of the american fisheries society, 117, 262–273. bolker, b. m. (2008). ecological models and data in r. princeton, nj: princeton university press. brown, r. s., steven, j. c., anderson, w. g., & mckinley, r. s. (1999). evidence to challenge the “2% rule” for biotelemetry. north american journal of fisheries management., 19, 867–871. burnham, k. p., & anderson, d. r. (2002). model selection and multimodel inference: a practical information theoretic approach (2nd ed.). new york, ny: springer. cech, j. j., mitchell, s. j., castleberry, d. t., & mcenroe, m. (1990). distribution of california stream fishes: influence of environmental temperature and hypoxia. environmental biology of fishes, 29, 95–105. christiansen, r. l. (2001). the quaternary and pliocene yellowstone plateau volcanic field of wyoming, idaho, and montana. professional paper 729-g. u.s. geological survey, denver, co. claeskens, g., & hjort, n. l. (2008). model selection and model averaging. new york: cambridge university press. collingsworth, p. d., & kohler, c. c. (2010). abundance and habitat use of juvenile sunfish among different macrophyte stands. lake and reservoir management, 26, 35–42. compton, b. w., rhymer, j. m., & mccollough, m. (2002). habitat selection by wood turtles (clemmys insculpta): an application of paired logistic regression. ecology, 83, 833–843. cotton, j. a., wharton, g., bass, j. a. b., heppell, c. m., & wotton, r. s. (2006). the effects of seasonal changes to in- stream vegetation cover on patterns of flow and accumulation of sediment. geomorphology, 77, 320–334. dauwalter, d. c., wenger, s. j., & gardner, p. (2014). the role of complexity in habitat use and selection by stream fishes in a snake river basin trib- utary. transactions of the american fisheries society, 143, 1177–1187. dennis, b. (1996). discussion: should ecologists become bayesians? ecological applications, 6, 1095–1103. desmet, n. j. s., belleghem, s. v., seuntjens, p., bouma, t. j., buis, k., & meire, p. (2011). quantification of the impact of macrophytes on ox- ygen dynamics and nitrogen retention in a vegetated lowland river. physics and chemistry of the earth, 36, 479–489. dibble, e. d., & pelicice, f. m. (2010). influence of aquatic plant- specific habitat on an assemblage of small neotropical floodplain fishes. ecology of freshwater fish, 19, 381–389. falke, j. a., dunham, j. b., jordan, c. e., mcnyset, k. m., & reeves, g. h. (2013). spatial ecological processes and local factors predict the distri- bution and abundance of spawning by steelhead (oncorhynchus_mykiss) across a complex riverscape. plos one, 8, 1–11. fausch, k. d. (1984). profitable stream positions for salmonids: relating specific growth rate to net energy gain. canadian journal of zoology, 62, 441–451. 664  |     fausch, k. d. (1993). experimental analysis of microhabitat selection by juvenile steelhead (oncorhynchus_mykiss) and coho salmon (o. kisutch) in a british columbia stream. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 50, 1198–1207. figueiredo, b. r., mormul, r. p., & thomaz, s. m. (2015). swimming and hid- ing regardless of the habitat: prey fish do not choose between native and non- native macrophyte species as a refuge. hydrobiologia, 746, 285–290. gregg, w. w., & rose, f. l. (1982). the effects of aquatic macrophytes on the stream microenvironment. aquatic botany, 14, 309–324. gregory, j. s. (2000). winter fisheries research and habitat improvements on the henry’s fork of the snake river. intermountain journal of aquatic sciences, 6, 232–248. griffith, j. s., & smith, r. w. (1995). failure of submersed macrophytes to provide cover for rainbow trout throughout their first winter in the henry’s fork of the snake river, idaho. north american journal of fisheries management, 15, 42–48. gurnell, a. (2014). plants as river system engineers. earth surface processes and landforms, 39, 4–25. harvey, b. c., & stewart, a. j. (1991). fish size and habitat depth relation- ships in headwater streams. oecologia, 87, 336–342. hearne, j. w., & armitage, p. d. (1993). implications of the annual macro- phyte growth cycle on habitat in rivers. regulated rivers: research and management, 8, 313–322. henry, a. (2010). aquatic macrophytes at the henrys fork of the snake river during 2009. final report to henry’s fork foundation. available at: http://henrysfork.org/files/research%20and%20restoration/aquatic %20macrophytes%20at%20the%20henrys%20fork%20of%20 the%20snake%20river_2009.pdf. accessed july 10, 2016. hosmer, d. w., & lemeshow, s. (1989). applied logistic regression. new york, ny: wiley & sons. hutchins, b. t., engel, a. s., nowlin, w. h., & schwartz, b. f. (2016). chemolithoautotrophy supports macroinvertebrate food webs and af- fects diversity and stability in groundwater communities. ecology, 97, 1530–1542. irwin, l. l., rock, d. f., & rock, s. c. (2012). habitat selection by north- ern spotted owls in mixed- coniferous forests. the journal of wildlife management, 76, 200–213. jankovsky-jones, m., & bezzerides, n. c. (2000). riparian ecology in the henry’s fork watershed. intermountain journal of sciences, 6, 159–177. johnson, r. k., & hering, d. (2010). spatial congruency of benthic diatom, invertebrate, macrophyte, and fish assemblages in european streams. ecological applications, 20, 978–992. jones, c. g., lawton, j. h., & shachak, m. (1994). organisms as ecosystem engineers (pp. 130–147). new york, ny: ecosystem management. springer. jones, j. b., & mulholland, p. j. (2000). streams and groundwaters (pp. 425). san diego, ca: academic press. kennedy, b. m., gale, w. l., & ostrand, k. g. (2006). relationship between smolt gill na+, k+ atpase activity and migration timing to avian pre- dation risk of steelhead trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) in a large estuary. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 64, 1506–1516. kozfkay, c. c., campbell, m. r., meyer, k. a., & schill, d. j. (2011). influences of habitat and hybridization on genetic structure of redband trout in the upper snake river basin, idaho. transactions of the american fisheries society, 140, 282–295. kuehne, l. m., & olden, j. d. (2016). environmental drivers of occupancy and detection of olympic mudminnow. transactions of the american fisheries society, 145, 17–26. lindeman, a. a., grant, j. w. a., & desjardins, c. m. (2014). density- dependent territory size and individual growth rate in juvenile atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). ecology of freshwater fish, 24, 15–22. lonzarich, d. l., & quinn, t. p. (1995). experimental evidence for the ef- fect of depth and structure on the distribution, growth, and survival of stream fishes. canadian journal of zoology, 73, 2223–2230. kuzniar et al. loomis, j. (2006). use of survey data to estimate value and regional eco- nomic effects of fishery improvements. north american journal of fisheries management., 26, 301–307. lopes, t. m., cunha, e. r., silva, j. c. b., behrend, r. d. l., & gomes, l. c. (2015). dense macrophytes influence the horizontal distribution of fish in floodplain lakes. environmental biology of fish, 98, 1741–1755. lovvorn, j. r., yule, d., & derby, c. e. (1999). greater predation by double- crested cormorants on cutthroat versus rainbow trout fingerlings stocked in a wyoming river. canadian journal of zoology, 77, 1984–1990. madsen, j. d., chambers, p. a., james, w. f., koch, e. w., & westlake, d. f. (2001). the interaction between water movement, sediment dynamics and submerged macrophytes. hydrobiologia, 444, 71–84. mather, m. e. (1998). the role of context- specific predation in understand- ing patterns exhibited by anadromous salmon. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 55, 232–246. matthews, k. r., & berg, n. h. (1997). rainbow trout response to water temperature and dissolved oxygen stress in two southern california stream pools. journal of fish biology, 50, 50–67. meyer, k. a., sullivan, c. l., kennedy, p., schill, d. j., teuscher, d. m., brimmer, a. f., & king, d. t. (2016). predation by american white pelicans and double- crested cormorants on catchable- sized hatchery rainbow trout in select idaho lentic waters. north american journal of fisheries management, 36, 294–308. minshall, g. w. (1978). autotrophy in stream ecosystems. bioscience, 28, 767–771. mitro, m. g., & zale, a. v. (2002). seasonal survival, movement, and habi- tat use of age- 0 rainbow trout in the henry’s fork of the snake river, idaho. transactions of the american fisheries society, 131, 271–286. murtaugh, p. a. (2014). in defense of p values. ecology, 95, 611–617. newfields. (2012). henrys fork island park caldera reach evalua- tion: hydrology, geomorphology, and sediment transport. project  completion report for henry’s fork foundation, ashton, id. 77 pp. available http://henrysfork.org/files/research%20and%20 restoration/120709henrysforkhydrogeomorphreportfinal_0. pdf. accessed july, 10, 2016. at: ormsbee, p. c., & mccomb, w. c. (1998). selection of day roosts by female long- legged myotis in the central oregon cascade range. the journal of wildlife management, 62, 596–603. pawatin, y. (2001). in all likelihood: statistical modeling and inference using likelihood. oxford: clarendon press. power, m. e. (1987). predator avoidance by grazing fishes in temperate and tropical streams: importance of stream depth and prey size. in w. c. kerfoot, & a. sih (eds.), predation: direct and indirect impacts on aquatic communities (pp. 333–351). hanover, nh: university press of new england. r core team. (2015). r: a language and environment for statistical computing. vienna, austria: r foundation for statistical computing. http://ww- w.r-project.org/. railsback, s. f., & harvey, b. c. (2002). analysis of habitat- selection rules using an individual- based model. ecology, 83, 1817–1830. raleigh, r. f., hickman, t., solomon, r. c., & nelson, p. c. (1984). habitat suitability information: rainbow trout. u.s. fish and wildlife service. fws/obs-82/10.60. 64 pp. ross, m. j., & kleiner, c. f. (1982). shielded- needle technique for surgi- cal implanting radio- frequency transmitters in fish. progressive fish culturist, 44, 41–43. sand-jensen, k. (1998). influence of submerged macrophytes on sediment composition and near bed flow in lowland streams. freshwater biology, 39, 663–679. schoby, g., high, b., keen, d., & garren, d. (2010). fishery management annual report, upper snake region. report #10-107, idaho department of fish and game, boise, id. available at: https://collaboration.idfg. idaho.gov/fisheriestechnicalreports/mgt10-107schoby2008%20 fishery%20management%20annual%20report%20upper%20 snake%20region.pdf. accessed july 10, 2016. kuzniar et al. schoby, g., high, b., keen, d., & garren, d. (2014). fishery management annual report, upper snake region. report #14-101, idaho department of fish and game, boise, id. available at: https://collaboration.idfg. idaho.gov/fisheriestechnicalreports/mgt14-101schoby2010%20 fishery%20management%20annual%20report%20upper%20 snake%20region%202010.pdf. accessed july 10, 2016. snyder, j. w. (1991). the winter and foraging ecology of the trumpeter swan, harriman state park of idaho. ph.d. thesis, idaho state university, pocatello, idaho, usa. 145pp. catalog record at: http://opac.isu. edu/cgi-bin/pwebrecon.cgi?pid=aynaivycncjaqynkgiehkeg- jrd&browse=17&hc=1&sid=1. accessed july 10, 2016. stauffer, h. b. (2008). contemporary bayesian and frequentist statistical re- search methods for natural resource scientists. hoboken, nj: wiley & sons. streubel, d. n., & griffith, j. s. (1993). use of boulder pocket habitat by rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) in fall river, idaho. great basin naturalist, 53, 194–198. taylor, e. b. (1991). a review of local adaptation in salmonidae, with particular reference to pacific and atlantic salmon. aquaculture, 98, 185–207. thomas, d. l., & taylor, e. j. (2006). study designs and tests for comparing resource use and availability ii. the journal of wildlife management, 70, 324–336. trebitz, a. s., & nebbelink, n. (1996). effect of pattern of vegetation re- moval on growth of bluegill: a simple model. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 53, 1844–1851. u.s. geological survey. information system data available on the world wide web (usgs water data for the nation). available http://waterdata.usgs.gov/id/nwis/ (2012). national water at:     |  665 uv/?site_no=13042500&parameter_cd=00065,00060,00010. accessed march 10, 2015. van kirk, r. w., & gamblin, m. (2000). history of fisheries management in the upper henry’s fork watershed. intermountain journal of sciences, 6, 263–284. van kirk, r. w., & martin, r. (2000). interactions among aquatic vegetation, waterfowl, flows, and the fishery below island park dam. intermountain journal of sciences, 6, 249–262. vinson, m. r., vinson, d. k., & angradi, t. r. (1992). aquatic macrophytes and instream flow characteristics of a rocky mountain river. rivers, 3, 260–265. vondracek, b., & longanecker, d. r. (1993). habitat selection by rainbow trout oncorhynchus_mykiss in a california stream: implications for the instream flow incremental methodology. ecology of freshwater fish, 2, 173–186. watson, d. (1987). hydraulic effects of aquatic weeds in u.k. rivers. regulated rivers: research and management, 1, 211–227. whiting, p. j., & stamm, j. (1995). the hydrology and form of spring- dominated channels. geomorphology, 12, 233–240. zierholz, c., prosser, i. p., fogarty, p. j., & rustomji, p. (2001). in- stream wetlands and their significance for channel filling and the catchment sediment budget, jugiong creek, new south wales. geomorphology, 38, 221–235. supporting information additional supporting information may be found online in the support- ing information tab for this article.  