ecology of freshwater fish 2010: 19: 566–577 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish seasonal meso- and microhabitat selection by the northern snakehead (channa argus) in the potomac river system lapointe nwr, thorson jt, angermeier pl. seasonal meso- and microhabitat selection by the northern snakehead (channa argus) in the potomac river system. ecology of freshwater fish 2010: 19: 566–577. ó 2010 john wiley & sons a ⁄ s abstract – the northern snakehead (channa argus) is a large piscivorous ﬁsh that is invasive in eastern europe and has recently been introduced in north america. we examined the seasonal habitat selection at meso- and microhabitat scales using radio-telemetry to increase understanding of the ecology of this species, which will help to inform management decisions. after the spawning season (postspawn season, september–november), northern snakeheads preferred offshore eurasian water-milfoil (myriophyllum spicatum) beds with shallow water (115 cm) and soft substrate. in the winter (november–april), these ﬁsh moved to deeper water (135 cm) with warmer temperatures, but habitat selection was weak at both scales. northern snakeheads returned to shallower water (95 cm) in the prespawn season (april–june) and used milfoil and other cover. habitat selection was the strongest at both meso- and microhabitat scales during the spawning season (june–september), when ﬁsh preferred macrophytes and cover in shallow water (88 cm). our results help to identify habitats at the risk of invasion by northern snakeheads. we suggest that control efforts and future research focus on shallow waters, and take into consideration the seasonal habitat preferences. n. w. r. lapointe1, j. t. thorson1, p. l. angermeier1,2 1department of fisheries and wildlife sciences, virginia polytechnic institute and state univer- sity, blacksburg, va, usa, 2united states geological survey, virginia cooperative fish and wildlife research unit*, virginia polytechnic institute & state university, blacksburg, va, usa key words: habitat; ﬁsh; telemetry; scale; invasion biology; nonindigenous n. w. r. lapointe, department of fisheries and wildlife sciences, 100, cheatham hall, virginia polytechnic institute and state university, blacksburg, va 24061-0321. usa; e-mail: nlapointe@gmail.com *the unit is jointly supported by u.s. geological survey, virginia polytechnic institute and state university, virginia department of game and inland fisheries, and wildlife management institute. accepted for publication may 27, 2010 introduction the northern snakehead (channa argus) is a large, freshwater, piscivorous ﬁsh that was introduced to north america from asia. several populations of the northern snakehead have become established in the usa, including the potomac river where the species was introduced as early as 1998 (odenkirk & owens 2005). the ﬁrst established population of the northern snakehead to be discovered was found in crofton pond, maryland, in 2002 and has been eradicated. since 2002, established populations have been dis- covered in virginia, maryland, pennsylvania, new york and arkansas (fuller & benson 2009). the northern snakehead is the only snakehead species predicted to survive in temperate regions of north america (herborg et al. 2007); however, the bullseye snakehead (channa marulius) has become established in florida and the blotched snakehead (channa maculata) has become established in hawaii. the giant snakehead (channa micropeltes) has been intro- duced numerous times from tennessee northward, but reproducing populations have not become established (fuller & benson 2009). the northern snakehead is considered a threat to the native fauna in temperate regions because of its broad tolerance of environmental conditions and varied diet, along with its previous success as an invader in eastern europe (courtenay & williams 2004; herborg et al. 2007). this species thrives in shallow, vegetated waters of diverse freshwater ecosystems, including lakes, rivers, streams, reservoirs, canals and ponds (courtenay & williams 2004); however, knowledge of the habitat preference of the northern snakehead is limited because there have been few scientiﬁc inves- tigations of its habitat. understanding the habitat preference of the northern its snakehead may improve our ability to predict 566 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00437.x environmental impacts and to develop management strategies for this invasive species. knowledge of the ecology of invasive species allows improvement of the quality of risk assessments by reducing biological uncertainty (mendoza-alfaro et al. 2009). habitat availability is a key determinant of an invader’s abundance, growth and reproductive potential. infor- mation on habitat use may aid in estimating the likelihood of establishment of the northern snakehead in new ecosystems, and in predicting its spread and impact in systems where it does become established. habitat preferences can also be used to infer relation- ships with native species; predation and competition can be expected to be highest for native species that use similar habitats. predation by nonindigenous ﬁshes can result in extirpation of native species (he & kitchell 1990; findlay et al. 2000). similarly, compe- tition with nonindigenous ﬁshes can extirpate or reduce the population size of native species (larson & moore 1985; blanchet et al. 2007). trout introduced lake_trout evaluation of potential impacts can inform decisions about whether to control or to eradicate invasive species. the national park service began controlling (salvelinus populations of namaycush) because severe declines in populations of (oncorhynchus native yellowstone cutthroat clarki bouvieri) were predicted, along with associated economic losses (johnson et al. 2009). when efforts are made to control or eradicate populations of the northern snakehead, knowledge of its habitat preference can improve success rates by informing managers of habitats to target. control of populations of the sea lamprey (petromyzon marinus) in the great lakes was facilitated by knowledge of their spawning habitat (smith & tibbles 1980). in addition, future research on the northern snakehead may also beneﬁt from baseline information on habitat use provided in this study. descriptions of habitat use are scale-dependent. macrohabitat preferences of the northern snakehead are relatively well understood; it prefers shallow, muddy, vegetated habitats (courtenay & williams 2004) and avoids deep, ﬂowing waters (owens et al. 2008). thus, our investigation focused on habitat selection at meso- and microhabitat scales. mesohab- itats are commonly described qualitatively in telemetry studies as open water, macrophytes, woody debris and similar structures (jones & stuart 2007). microhabitat is more commonly described by quantitatively mea- suring variables such as water depth and temperature at a speciﬁc location (e.g., daugherty & sutton 2005). odenkirk & owens (2005) reported the collection of northern snakeheads in the potomac river from waters <2 m deep with submergent or emergent vegetation and near shorelines, channel edges or boat slips. in a radio-telemetry study of northern snake- heads in the potomac river, owens et al. (2008) habitat selection by northern snakehead demonstrated preference for hydrilla (hydrilla verti- cillata) and ﬂoating docks during the spawning season, and for hydrilla and eurasian water-milfoil (myriophyllum spicatum) after the spawning season. their results were confounded because all of these habitats were common in their study area, and their study design did not account for habitat availability. we found no detailed studies of the microhabitat preference of the northern snakehead. we used radio-telemetry to study meso- and micro- habitat use of northern snakeheads in the potomac river catchment. telemetry is a popular tool for determining the habitat use of ﬁshes, including the northern pike (esox lucius), ﬂathead catﬁsh (pylodictis olivaris), asian carps and common carp (cyprinus carpio) (daugherty & sutton 2005; stuart & jones 2006; degrandchamp et al. 2008; kobler et al. 2008). additionally, we examined how habitat use changed with season. habitat preferences of northern snake- heads are affected by seasonal changes in habitat availability such as the growth and senescence of aquatic macrophytes and changes in water tempera- ture. activities of northern snakeheads can be grouped into four distinct behavioural seasons (prespawn, spawning, postspawn and winter), during which different behaviours such as foraging, spawning and resting generally require unique habitats (owens et al. 2008; n. lapointe, pers. obs.). our objectives were to investigate: (i) seasonal changes in microhabitat use, (ii) microhabitat variables for predicting the occurrence of northern snakeheads each season, (iii) strength of microhabitat selection by season and (iv) mesohabitat preferences by season. additionally, we explored how tide affected micro- habitat selection and whether inactive northern snake- heads rested in different habitats than those used by active ﬁsh during winter. study area our study area encompassed gunston cove, dogue creek bay and little hunting creek, which are tributaries and embayments of the potomac river (fig. 1). we also sampled nearby areas of the potomac river. these areas are shallow (rarely deeper than 3 m), have extensive aquatic vegetation, show tidal inﬂuences and have salinities of 0–3 ppt. the potomac river is located in the eastern usa and is the second- largest tributary of the chesapeake bay. materials and methods tag implantation we captured 49 northern snakeheads by boat elec- troﬁshing (438–722 mm total length, sd = 79; 567 lapointe et al. 790–3489 g, sd = 795) and implanted them with radio tags in october 2006. of these, 10 were captured and released in gunston cove (including pohick and accotink creek embayments), 10 in little hunting creek and 29 in dogue creek. fish were anaesthetised )1), and radio-transmitters with ms-222 (200 mgæl were surgically implanted into their peritoneal cavities. incisions were sealed with single, interrupted sutures so that whip antennas trailed from the incision’s posterior edge. the northern snakehead is an obligate air-breather (courtenay & williams 2004). thus, the ﬁsh were observed for >15 min after surgery with their heads held above water to prevent drowning until they had fully recovered. these methods are similar to those used by owens et al. (2008), which resulted in high tag retention and low mortality rates. all ﬁsh were captured, tagged and released 11–26 october 2006. the radio tags (advanced telemetry systems, inc., isanti, mn, usa) weighed 15.5 g; they had a pulse rate of 40 ppm, a pulse width of 20 ms, a warranty life 568 fig. 1. map of the study area, including creeks and embayments where habitat was measured. resolution increases from panels i to iii. of 327 days and a battery life of 654 days. the tags transmitted at 150–151.999 mhz and were equipped with a mortality sensor that signalled when the tag did not move for >8 h. the tags weighed <2% of the mass of the smallest ﬁsh (winter 1996). fish were located using a four-element yagi antenna and a challenger scanning (advanced telemetry systems, inc., isanti, mn, usa) receiver. data collection we began tracking ﬁsh on 19 october 2006 and located ﬁsh monthly through march 2007. from april to mid-june 2007, we located ﬁsh once per week, and from mid-june to mid-august 2007, we located ﬁsh twice per week. most tracking occurred between 06:30 and 18:30 h. we recorded utm (universal transverse mercator) coordinates of each ﬁsh’s location with a garmin (gps 12xl) inc., olathe, ks, usa) global positioning satellite (gps) unit, along with date and time. average accuracy of (garmin international, locations (8.9 m; sd = 5.1) was estimated by repeat- edly locating (n = 22) ﬁsh displaying mortality signals in open water. this was similar to the average gps error (8.7 m; sd = 7.7), determined by marking locations (n = 9) at the same point on shore. thus, locating errors appeared to be attributable to gps error, and we were conﬁdent that ﬁsh were tracked to within 1 m of their true location (plus gps error). certain ﬁsh could not be reached at times because of shallow water or restricted access (e.g., military base). habitat data were not collected on these occasions. detailed microhabitat measurements were made for each ﬁsh’s location (deemed ‘snakehead observa- tions’). we measured water temperature (°c) and salinity (ppt) at 10 cm below the surface with an ysi 85 metre (ysi inc., yellow springs, oh, usa). we measured water clarity with a 120-cm-long turbidity tube (wildlife supply company, buffalo, ny, usa) to the nearest centimetre; lower measurements repre- sented higher turbidity. water that appeared turbid but still exceeded 120 cm on the turbidity tube was recorded as 120 cm. water appearing completely clear was recorded as 150 cm. we measured depth to the nearest 5 cm with a wooden dowel. the same dowel was used to estimate per cent composition of substrate classes by prodding the substrate in multiple places and examining ﬁne substrates clinging to the dowel. substrate classes were soft (silt and sand), hard (sand and hard clay) and coarse (gravel, cobble, boulder). cover was recorded as one of four categories: none, structures (ﬂoating and wooden docks, duck blinds, pillars), ﬂoating debris (algae, decaying macrophytes, wood, garbage) and woody debris (fallen trees, sunken logs, beaver dams, overhanging terrestrial vegetation and roots). the per cent of the water column ﬁlled by macrophytes and ﬁlamentous algae was estimated visually. when the water column could not be viewed because of high turbidity or macrophyte ⁄ ﬁlamentous algae surface cover, the per cent cover of the surface was used. a general, qualitative description of mes- ohabitat was recorded for an approximately 2-m radius around the estimated ﬁsh location. an additional habitat measurement was made at a paired, random location for all observations from october 2006 to march 2007 and for every second week from april to august 2007 (deemed ‘random observations’). the random location was determined by selecting a random compass bearing from the habitat sample and travelling 100 m in embayments or if a shoreline or obstacle was 50 m in creeks. the direction was encountered on that bearing, adjusted and travel continued until the necessary distance was reached. these distances were selected to balance the avoidance of autocorrelation of microhab- itat variables between paired samples with efﬁciency in the ﬁeld (i.e., limiting travel time). shorter distances habitat selection by northern snakehead were used in creeks because habitats were less homogeneous and frequent directional adjustments for obstacles and shorelines increased the travel time. to determine how habitat use varied with tide, tide levels were estimated from historical data at http:// www.saltwatertides.com. the per cent tide remaining was estimated based on the time a ﬁsh was located relative to high and low tides for the current tidal cycle. tide data for gunston cove and mount vernon were used, depending on the location of each ﬁsh. tides were divided into four periods representing high (upper 75% of tides), outgoing (74% to 26% out), low (bottom 25% of tides) and incoming (26% to 74% in). the following seasons were deﬁned: postspawn (16 september–15 november), winter (16 november–19 april), prespawn (20 april–7 june) and spawn (8 june–15 september). dates were based on previous studies (owens et al. 2008), along with data for behaviour and condition (lapointe , n.w.r, odenkirk, j.s & angermeier, p.l. unpubl. data). the day 19 april 2007 was the last day that mortality signals were detected in association with inactivity due to cold temperature. the day 7 june 2007 was the onset of peak spawning season, based on gonado-somatic indices (a. gascho landis, unpubl. data). unlike owens et al. (2008), we included december in the winter season because northern snakeheads had moved to areas where they remained throughout winter. data preparation substrate categories and vegetation types were com- bined to reduce the number of variables used in analyses. filamentous algae and the three most common macrophytes (milfoil, hydrilla and coontail, ceratophyllum demersum) were treated as separate variables. rarer macrophytes were grouped into categories, based on similarities in physical shape and habitats occupied. spatterdock (nuphar polyse- pala) and common arrowhead (sagittaria latifolia) were combined as one variable because both were found on shallow tidal ﬂats. bulrush (scirpus spp.) and other emergent vegetation found along shorelines and shallower tidal ﬂats were also combined into a single variable. finally, native submergent macro- phytes including chara (chara spp.), water stargrass (heteranthera dubia), water celery (vallisneria amer- icana) and water nymph (najas spp.) were often found together and were combined into one variable. mesohabitat was classiﬁed into eight categories: (i) hydrilla beds (large areas where hydrilla was the dominant macrophyte), (ii) milfoil beds, (iii) mixed macrophyte beds, (iv) spatterdock and arrowhead beds (very shallow, often tidal, with spatterdock and arrowhead dominant), (v) open water (offshore, often turbid, with few or no macrophytes present), (vi) creek 569 lapointe et al. channels (similar to open water, but with some current), (vii) inshore areas (a mix of the above categories but adjacent to shore) and (viii) wooden docks and marinas (any areas where man-made structures dominated). less than ﬁve per cent of the observations contained missing values because of data entry omissions or equipment failure. when possible, missing values were estimated from similar samples (e.g., missing water temperature ﬁlled in from the following obser- vation). observations containing missing values that could not be reliably estimated (<5%) were deleted prior to analysis. statistical methods we analysed the changes in microhabitat variables for snakehead observations over time. data for snakehead observations (i.e., excluding random observations) were graphed to show seasonal changes as scatterplots by julian date, with trends shown as cubic splines with the number of knots chosen ad hoc (ott & longnecker 2001). statistical tests were also performed to estimate the signiﬁcance of seasonal differences in microhabitat variables that were not likely to change over time (e.g., depth, other cover, substrate). tests were chosen to be nonparametric (kruskall–wallis as omnibus, mann– whitney u as post hoc), with the null hypothesis that microhabitat variables for snakehead observations would be similar among seasons. all tests were conducted at 0.10 signiﬁcance within the r statistical environment (r development core team 2009). we identiﬁed which variables were most useful in predicting the occurrence of northern snakeheads in each season. logistic regression was used to estimate the snakehead microhabitat selection by season, with microhabitat variables used to distinguish between snakehead and random observations (which were interpreted as case–control samples sensu keating & cherry 2004). microhabitat selection was evaluated separately for each season due to major seasonal differences observed in the ﬁeld (fig. 2) and shown by fig. 2. examples of northern snakehead locations (d) by season in dogue creek bay. each panel shows all locations from a single tracking session in a season. mortal- ities and dispersal reduced the number locations in prespawn and spawning of seasons. dates of tracking sessions are: postspawn, 7–9 november 2006; winter, 5–7 march 2007; prespawn, 11 may 2007; and spawn, 6–12 july 2007. 570 test of the assumption that results from analyses of microhabitat variables. signiﬁcant variables were identiﬁed by backwards stepwise model selection, starting with the full model (i.e., including all available variables; ott & long- necker 2001). variables were dropped in reverse order of signiﬁcance as estimated using wald tests (e.g., ^h=seð^hþ compared with a normal distribution; david- son & mackinnon 2004). we used a 0.10 signiﬁcance cut-off in the ‘design’ package in r (harrell 2008). microhabitat selection logistic regressions did not control for tide (because this would require several additional degrees of freedom), so we performed an a posteriori tide did not strongly inﬂuence habitat selection. to test the inﬂu- ence of tide on habitat selection, we performed a logistic regression distinguishing between spawning- season high and low tides (which were hypothesised to display the strongest difference due to tide). addition- ally, we observed individual northern snakeheads occasionally going inactive for extended periods of time (i.e., displayed mortality signals but later were conﬁrmed alive) during winter. to investigate whether ﬁsh selected speciﬁc microhabitats in which to remain inactive, we performed a logistic regression between active and inactive snakehead observations in winter. we used logistic regression to identify important variables (as opposed to, say, mann–whitney u-tests) because (i) it allows the impact of individual variables to be evaluated while controlling for the effect of other important variables, (ii) it does not require speciﬁca- tion of a sequential testing correction and (iii) it does not have distributional assumptions for independent variables (which often were proportion measures and, hence, nonparametric) or model residuals (bewick et al. 2005). although principal components regres- sion and stepwise selection using the akaike infor- mation criterion may have improved the overall predictive accuracy (burnham & anderson 2002), the study’s focus was on the importance of individual variables, which motivated the use of untransformed independent variables. we estimated the strength of microhabitat selection in each season using an ad hoc procedure developed to control for the impact of sample size (which differed among seasons) on the number of variables selected. this procedure used a nonparametric bootstrap (efron & gong 1983) to select a subsample of standardised size (n = 100) from each season, which was ﬁt with a logistic model using all available variables. the nagelkerke r2 was calculated for each bootstrap iteration, and the median r2 was used to describe strength of microhabitat selection for that season. we evaluated mesohabitat selection for each season by comparing the distributions of mesohabitat mea- surements for snakeheads and random observations. we tested for each season separately using a pearson chi- habitat selection by northern snakehead squared test for homogeneity (signiﬁcance = 0.10). chi-squared tests were performed with jmp 7.0.1 (sas 2007). results we located ﬁsh 860 times during the study and collected an additional 528 additional random sam- ples. eleven ﬁsh died during the study period, and an additional 12 ﬁsh dispersed from the study area during the prespawn period. thus, 48 ﬁsh were located 116 (+85 random) times during the postspawn period, 44 ﬁsh were located 206 (+174 random) times during the winter period, 42 ﬁsh were located 226 (+126 random) times during the prespawn period and 29 ﬁsh were located 312 (+143 random) times during the spawning period. overall, northern snakeheads preferred shallow (<2 m) habitats with cover; however, ﬁsh occupied distinctive parts of the study area in each season (fig. 2). these differences were more apparent in embayments (dogue creek and gunston cove) than in little hunting creek. fish were found both inshore and offshore in outer bays during the postspawn season but moved entirely offshore into deeper water in winter. fish stayed in the macrophyte beds that remained in deeper offshore waters until spring. during the pre- spawn season, ﬁsh moved upstream into inner bays, creek mouths and upstream sites in the creeks. many ﬁsh remained in these areas during the spawning season, whereas others moved farther upstream in creeks or back to outer bays and shorelines. microhabitat selection was weak during the post- spawn season (nagelkerke r2 = 0.26). northern snakeheads were found primarily offshore in large milfoil beds, which were most prevalent during this season. during the postspawn season, northern snake- heads selected deeper water than during any season but winter and were less likely to be associated with other forms of cover than during the prespawn and postspawn season. fish preferred soft substrates in the prespawn and postspawn seasons when compared with winter, but avoided coarse substrates in the winter when compared with the spawning season (table 1, fig. 3). at the microhabitat scale, northern snakeheads were positively associated with milfoil (habitat mean = 22%, random mean = 17%), which was the only variable selected by stepwise logistic regression (table 2). mesohabitat selection was nearly statisti- cally signiﬁcant, with ﬁsh most strongly avoiding open water and preferring hydrilla beds (table 3). microhabitat selection was the weakest during winter (nagelkerke r2 = 0.17). during the winter, however, northern snakeheads selected deeper water with more soft substrate than during any other season and avoided other forms of cover and coarse substrate 571 lapointe et al. table 1. seasonal means in ‘habitat’ measurements. variable depth (cm) other cover (%) soft substrate (%) coarse substrate (%) postspawn winter prespawn spawning 116 b 7 b 85 c 1 b 136 a 3 c 96 a 1 b 94 c 17 a 87 b 3 b 88 c 20 a 72 c 6 a results of post hoc tests following kruskall–wallis tests (all signiﬁcant at p < 0.001) for seasonal differences in microhabitat values are shown by letters below means. different letters signify signiﬁcant differences (p < 0.10) among seasons. (table 1, fig. 3). only temperature was selected at the microhabitat scale; ﬁsh preferred warmer water temperature (habitat mean = 7.5 °c, random mean = 6.9 °c; table 2). similarly, only temperature differed between microhabitats used by active (7.6 °c) and inactive (5.4 °c) ﬁsh (table 2). mesohabitat selection was not signiﬁcant (table 3). microhabitat selection increased during the pre- spawn season (nagelkerke r2 = 0.30). fish moved to shallower waters with more cover than postspawn and winter seasons, and preferred soft substrate compared with the spawning season but not compared with winter (table 1, fig. 3). at the microhabitat scale, ﬁsh selected habitats with shallower water (habitat random mean = 116 cm) and with mean = 94 cm, more milfoil random mean = 1.5%) and other (habitat mean = 17%, random mean = 5%; table 2). meso- habitat selection was not signiﬁcant (table 3). (habitat mean = 3.2%, forms of cover habitat selection was strongest during the spawning season (nagelkerke r2 = 0.49). fish were more likely to use coarse substrate and less likely to use soft substrate than in other seasons, but they remained in shallow waters and continued to use other forms of cover as in the prespawn season (table 1, fig. 3). microhabitats were most strongly selected in the spawning season, with nine variables selected by stepwise logistic regression (table 2). fish selected shallower water random mean = 118 cm) with lower water clarity (habitat mean = 108 cm, and with more coarse substrate (habitat mean = 5.8%, random mean = 2.4%) and other forms of cover (habitat mean = 20%, random mean = 10%). all macrophytes were preferred (milfoil habitat mean = 7.5%, habitat mean = 24%, random mean = 15%; coontail habitat mean = 3.6%, random mean = 1.6%; other native sub- mergent macrophytes habitat mean = 8.5%, random mean = 3.5%; spatterdock and arrowhead habitat random mean = 98 cm) (habitat mean = 88 cm, random mean = 4.4%; hydrilla 572 values clarity; (clarity = water fig. 3. microhabitat sub- strate = soft substrate, i.e., sand and silt; spatterdock = spatterdock and arrowhead) by date. each sample is represented by a d, while trend over time (e.g., a cubic spline) is shown by a line. date is shown on the x-axis. units for the y-axis are cm (depth, water clarity), parts per thousand (salinity), degrees celsius (temperature) and percentage (all other variables). variables not shown here had similar patterns; hydrilla was similar to milfoil, all other vegetation variables were similar to spatterdock and arrowhead, and hard and coarse substrate had patterns opposite to that shown for soft substrate. mean = 5.3%, random mean = 0.9%), except bulrush and other emergent vegetation. tide affected microha- bitat selection: ﬁsh selected deeper waters at high tide (high-tide mean = 102 cm, low tide mean = 83 cm) and preferred milfoil at low tide (high-tide mean = 3.3%, low-tide mean = 6.4%; table 2). mesohabitats table 2. parameter estimates, standard errors (se) and wald p-values for logistic regression microhabitat variables remaining after backwards selec- tion (excluding intercepts; negative values denote a selection for the null response): (a) models distinguishing between snakehead (null) and random observations (alternative), blocked by season; (b) a model distinguishing between active (null) and inactive (alternative) snakehead measurements in winter; and (c) a model distinguishing between high-tide (null) and low-tide (alternative) snakehead observations in the spawning season. variable (a) postspawn milfoil winter temperature prespawn depth other cover milfoil spawn depth water clarity other cover milfoil hydrilla coontail native submergent spatterdock coarse substrate (b) temperature (c) depth milfoil estimate se wald test p-value )0.014 )0.064 0.009 )1.083 )0.041 0.015 0.006 )0.935 )0.064 )0.019 )0.052 )0.042 )0.069 )0.018 )0.3 )0.035 0.069 0.008 0.034 0.003 0.476 0.019 0.004 0.004 0.356 0.015 0.006 0.02 0.012 0.022 0.008 0.094 0.062 0.001 0.023 0.033 0 0.075 0.009 0 0.004 0.008 0.001 0.002 0.034 0.081 0 0.009 0.029 <0.001 0.019 were most strongly selected during the spawning season. creek channels and open water were most strongly avoided; and mixed macrophyte beds, inshore areas, and spatterdock and arrowhead beds were most strongly preferred (table 3). discussion northern snakeheads selected unique habitats in each behavioural season, with habitat selection strongest during the spawning season at both meso- and microhabitat scales (fig. 4). habitat selection was most clearly demonstrated at the microhabitat scale. overall, snakehead habitat preferences appear to be driven by an afﬁnity for cover, including macrophytes and soft substrate. cover types that were available and those that were preferred differed with season. postspawn season during the postspawn season, northern snakehead habitat use was driven by the presence of dense beds of macrophytes (particularly milfoil and hydrilla) found offshore in shallow embayments. we conclude habitat selection by northern snakehead table 3. chi-squared tests of homogeneity of mesohabitat for snakehead and random observations, blocked by four study seasons: (a) test results, with the total number of observations (n), and degrees of freedom (d.f.) differ among seasons because not all mesohabitat categories were observed in each season; (b) the proportion of snakehead observations in each mesohabitat category minus the proportion of random observations in each mesohabitat category. (a) season postspawn winter prespawn spawn (b) n 200 378 349 446 d.f. 7 5 5 7 pearson chi-squared p 12.0 4.8 7.1 52.7 0.1005* 0.4378* 0.2136 <0.001 mesohabitat postspawn winter prespawn spawn hydrilla beds milfoil beds mixed macrophyte beds spatterdock and arrowhead beds open water creek channels shorelines wooden docks and marinas 0.08 0.02 0.03 0.02 )0.16 0.01 )0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 )0.03 0.02 0.01 )0.01 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.03 )0.06 )0.06 0.05 0.01 )0.03 0.04 0.11 0.07 )0.14 )0.16 0.09 0.02 negative values represent a higher proportion of random observations for that category. *20% of cells had expected count <5, chi-squared test suspect. selection relative that northern snakehead preference for milfoil affected microhabitat seasons because offshore milfoil and hydrilla beds generally had deeper water with more soft substrates than other parts of the study area. to other in contrast with the prespawn and spawning seasons, we did not observe northern snakeheads in ﬂoating and woody debris along shorelines or in spatterdock and arrowhead beds, which continued to dominate shallow tidal ﬂats. possible explanations include an overall preference for offshore macrophyte beds as cover and habitat selection based on postspawn foraging behav- iour. northern snakeheads may prefer expansive milfoil and hydrilla beds, but such beds were not fully developed until the postspawn season. alternate forms of cover (e.g., ﬂoating debris, spatterdock) may have been selected until macrophyte beds were more available. additionally, foraging behaviour may have driven the selection of macrophytes beds. northern snakeheads feed most actively during the prespawn and postspawn seasons (gascho landis, a.m., lapointe, n.w.r., angermeier, p.l., unpubl. data), and macro- phyte beds may offer optimal foraging conditions during the postspawn season. young-of-year of many prey ﬁshes were readily available during this season and probably preferred this habitat (grenouillet et al. 2001; lapointe et al. 2007). 573 lapointe et al. of fig. 4. conceptual model northern snakehead habitat use by season. transition periods between seasons are shown by arrows, along with approximate dates and temperatures at which habitat preferences change. text in boxes describes seasonal habitat preferences at micro- and mesohab- itat scales. embayment shorelines, which often offered cover in various forms. we attribute associations with milfoil to a preference for the only overwintering macrophyte beds. macrophyte growth had begun, but macrophytes remained rare until the end of the prespawn season. sparse patches of overwintering milfoil may have provided cover during the early prespawn season. preference for macrophytes may have been driven by feeding behaviour. feeding rates increased during the prespawn season (gascho landis et al., unpubl. data), and prey were probably concentrated along shoreline cover and in macrophyte beds (werner et al. 1983). additionally, shallow habitats may have been warmer and more hospitable than in winter, allowing ﬁsh to move to inshore areas with abundant cover. spawning season habitat selection was the strongest during the spawn- ing season at both spatial scales. coarse substrates were most commonly selected during this season and were found primarily along shorelines, which northern snakeheads may have been using for spawning. northern snakeheads construct and guard nests in patches of macrophytes (courtenay & williams 2004), and nests must be constructed in areas that protect ﬂoating eggs from current and wave action (gascho landis & lapointe 2010). fish moving to protected inshore areas for spawning purposes were thus asso- ciated with coarse substrates. northern snakeheads also preferred macrophytes during the spawning season, likely for spawning and cover. we could not determine why northern snakeheads preferred lower water clarity, given that clarity increased in patches of macrophytes where sediment could settle from the winter season habitat selection was the weakest during winter at both scales. fish moved to the deepest parts of embayments where soft substrates dominated and where micro- habitats were mostly homogenous. fish may have avoided shallow, inshore areas despite the cover available there (docks, woody debris, etc.), because these areas exhibited larger temperature ﬂuctuations. our results showed that active ﬁsh selected warmer habitats, possibly explaining the consistent large (>500 m) movements observed during winter (n. lapointe, pers. obs.). conversely, remaining in cooler waters may have driven northern snakeheads into a state of torpor, where movement ceased for >8 h. despite the nonsigniﬁcant associations between ﬁsh and macrophytes or other forms of cover in winter, northern snakeheads may still have selected habitats based on cover. soft substrate may offer a form of cover, given observations of northern snakeheads burrowing in sediments when water was removed from ponds (courtenay & williams 2004). we observed this behaviour in shallow, open water when releasing ﬁsh after tag implantation. additionally, our habitat obser- vations were limited by higher turbidity during the winter months. we observed sparse milfoil throughout the winter, and we often found it on the boat anchor even when it was not observed from the surface. northern snakeheads may have selected deeper offshore habitats for cover provided by sparse milfoil in winter. prespawn season during the prespawn season, ﬁsh moved back to shallower waters of inner bays, creek channels and 574 water column. strong mesohabitat preferences may have reﬂected a preference for cover and selection of spawning habitat; open water and creek channels were most strongly avoided during this season. other observations in beds spatterdock ⁄ arrowhead our observations of northern snakehead habitat selec- tion with respect to tides did not match our analytical results. at high tides, we frequently observed northern snakeheads and patches of dense emergent vegetation in very shallow (<30 cm) water. as the tide receded, northern snake- heads moved to the margins of these habitats, presumably holding to cover and feeding on prey being pushed out by the tide. the proportion of individuals exhibiting such behaviour was low, explaining the lack of statistical evidence for this pattern. instead, milfoil was shown to be important at low tides, when other cover was probably unavailable. overall, our observations and results suggest that tide played a relatively minor role in habitat selection and that differences among tides did not have a major impact on other microhabitat associations. we rarely observed northern snakeheads while tracking. if we remained still near tagged ﬁsh for more than 15 min, we frequently observed them swimming. this suggests that northern snakeheads do not always remain in cover, as opposed to ambush predators such as esocids, which often remain stationary for extended periods (webb & skadsen 1980). northern snakeheads appeared to exhibit a ﬂeeing response to nearby cover in response to tracking activities but did not appear to travel far (i.e., ﬁsh rarely seemed to be ‘pushed’ a signiﬁcant distance by the boat). although we expect that microhabitat data were somewhat biased towards the presence of cover (debris, macrophytes, soft sub- strate), we believe that nearby availability of such cover is integral to northern snakehead meso- and microhabitat selection. study design that our results suggest the evaluation of habitat selection is most informative at the microhabitat scale. we often observed differences in habitat selection at the microhabitat scale when mesohabitat selection did not occur. telemetry studies of ﬁshes often focus on the mesohabitat scale. habitat is categorised, and preference is described by identifying the most common habitats observed (e.g., jones & stuart 2007; owens et al. 2008) or comparing use and availability (e.g., degrandchamp et al. 2008). fewer telemetry studies have measured microhabitat vari- ables (but see degrandchamp et al. 2008; okland habitat selection by northern snakehead et al. 2005), although habitat availability (e.g., mea- suring microhabitat at random sites) is rarely consid- ered. contrary to owens et al. (2008), we did not ﬁnd strong selection of hydrilla and wooden docks during the spawning season, after accounting for habitat availability. other studies have mapped habitat using remotely sensed data or ﬁeld samples (e.g., paukert & willis 2002; daugherty & sutton 2005; kobler et al. 2008); however, seasonal changes in habitat condi- tions coupled with low within-season sample size prevented us from reliably mapping habitat in the study area. although spatial autocorrelation of snake- head and random observations may have inhibited the detection of mesohabitat selection during some sea- sons (e.g., postspawn, when ﬁsh were found in relatively homogeneous offshore macrophyte beds), this was not always the case. during the prespawn season, mesohabitat selection was not detected, even though unique mesohabitats were regularly found within 50–100 m of snakehead observations. we believe our results are typical for the potomac river catchment, even though annual differences in rainfall and temperature may affect the habitat avail- ability and selection by northern snakeheads. we expect that only minimal errors in logistic regression estimates of microhabitat selection (either spurious identiﬁcation of variables or inaccurate estimation of parameters) may have arisen from variables for which we did not control, such as individual id or tide. failure to compensate for individual id (i.e., as a ﬁxed effect) may cause biases when the number of individ- uals is small (otis & white 1999); however, our study located 29–48 individuals in each season. we did not measure habitat use during late spawn- ing season or early postspawn season, from mid- august to mid-october. the time when northern snakehead transition from speciﬁc microhabitats selected during the spawning season to homogenous macrophyte beds selected during the postspawn season remains unknown, although we expect this transition to be somewhat gradual. during the early postspawn period, water temperatures averaged around 20 °c and hydrilla was probably dominant over milfoil; however, we expect that general habitat preferences were similar to those observed in late postspawn season (i.e., offshore macrophyte beds). management insight the information provided here can be used to further reﬁne risk assessments, infer potential impacts and identify potential northern snakehead habitats in other systems. the invasibility of an ecosystem can be estimated by the availability of important habitat characteristics such as soft substrates, macrophytes and other forms of cover. potential impacts can be 575 lapointe et al. estimated by inferring predation through habitat overlap with prey species, and competition through habitat overlap with other piscivores. for example, we commonly observed prey such as lepomis spp. and fundulus spp., and piscivores such as largemouth bass (micropterus salmoides) in similar habitats as northern snakehead (n. lapointe, pers. obs.). in the mississippi and hudson river drainages where northern snakehead have recently established (fuller & benson 2009), our results can help managers identify likely habitats and locate ﬁsh. our results complement earlier suggestions that control may be most effective during the spawning season prior to juvenile dispersal (jiao et al. 2009) when northern snakeheads are least mobile (n. lapointe, pers. obs.), and can be used to develop and reﬁne control strategies for northern snakehead. we have provided detailed information on habitat use of northern snakeheads in each behavioural season, allowing collection efforts to be focused on locations where ﬁsh are most likely to be found. additionally, our results show that habitat selection is the strongest during the spawning season, suggesting that locations likely to harbour northern snakehead can be most easily targeted at this time of year. acknowledgements the authors thank ryan saylor for help in the ﬁeld. many others provided help and advice, including craig harms, scott klopfer, brian murphy, john odenkirk and steve owens. we wish to thank lene´e pennington (vdgif) for providing map data. this research was supported by the u.s. geological survey (usgs) cooperative research unit at virginia tech, a grant from the usgs invasive species program, and a natural science and engineering research council of canada postgraduate fellow- ship. the virginia department of game and inland fisheries contributed biologists’ time and equipment, and fort belvoir provided boat storage and launching facilities. the work was greatly improved by comments from andrew gascho landis, d. allen pattillo, matt j. macdonald and anonymous reviewers. any use of trade, product or ﬁrm name does not imply endorsement by the u.s. government. references bewick, v., cheek, l. & ball, j. 2005. statistics review 14: logistic regression. critical care 9: 112–118. blanchet, s., loot, g., grenouillet, g. & brosse, s. 2007. competitive interactions between native and exotic salmo- nids: a combined ﬁeld and laboratory demonstration. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 133–143. burnham, k.p. & anderson, d.r. 2002. model selection and information-theoretical multimodel approach, 2nd edn. new york: springer-verlag. 488 pp. inference: a practical courtenay, w.r. jr & williams, j.d. 2004. snakeheads (pisces, channidae): a biological synopsis and risk assessment. u.s. geological survey circular 1251. 576 daugherty, d.j. & sutton, t.m. 2005. seasonal movement patterns, habitat use, and home range of ﬂathead catﬁsh in the lower st. joseph river, michigan. north american journal of fisheries management 25: 256–269. davidson, r. & mackinnon, j.g. 2004. econometric theory and methods. oxford: oxford university press. 750 pp. degrandchamp, k.l., garvey, j.e. & colombo, r.e. 2008. movement and habitat selection by invasive asian carps in a large river. transactions of the american fisheries society 137: 45–56. efron, b. & gong, g. 1983. a leisurely look at the bootstrap, the jackknife, and cross-validation. american statistical association 37: 36–48. findlay, c.s., bert, d.g. & zheng, l.g. 2000. effect of introduced piscivores on native minnow communities in adirondack lakes. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 57: 570–580. fuller, p.f. & benson, a.j. 2009. channa argus. gainsville, fl: usgs nonindigenous aquatic species database. gascho landis, a. & lapointe, n.w.r. 2010. first record of a northern snakehead (channa argus) nest in north america. northeastern naturalist 17: 325–332. grenouillet, g., pont, d. & olivier, j.m. 2001. linking zooplankton and juvenile ﬁsh assemblages in a large lowland river: inﬂuence of submerged macrophytes. archiv fur hydrobiologie 151: 383–404. harrell, f.e. 2008. design: design package. r package version 2.1-2 world wide web electronic publication. available at: http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/s/design (accessed 9 july 2010). he, x. & kitchell, j.f. 1990. direct and indirect effects of predation on a ﬁsh community – a whole-lake experi- ment. transactions of the american fisheries society 119: 825–835. herborg, l.m., mandrak, n.e., cudmore, b.c. & maclsaac, h.j. 2007. comparative distribution and invasion risk of snakehead (channidae) and asian carp (cyprinidae) species in north america. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 64: 1723–1735. jiao, y., lapointe, n.w.r., angermeier, p.l. & murphy, b.r. 2009. hierarchical demographic approaches for assessing invasion dynamics of non-indigenous species: an example using northern snakehead (channa arugs). ecological mod- elling 220: 1681–1689. johnson, b.m., arlinghaus, r. & martinez, p.j. 2009. are we doing all we can to stem the tide of illegal ﬁsh stocking? fisheries 34: 389–394. jones, m.j. & stuart, i.g. 2007. movements and habitat use of common carp (cyprinus carpio) and murray cod (maccul- lochella peelii peelii) juveniles in a large lowland australian river. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 210–220. keating, k.a. & cherry, s. 2004. use and interpretation of logistic regression in habitat-selection studies. journal of wildlife management 68: 774–789. kobler, a., klefoth, t., wolter, c., fredrich, f. & arlinghaus, r. 2008. contrasting pike (esox lucius l.) movement and habitat choice between summer and winter in a small lake. hydrobiologia 601: 17–27. lapointe, n.w.r., corkum, l.d. & mandrak, n.e. 2007. seasonal and ontogenic shifts in microhabitat selection by ﬁshes in the shallow waters of the detroit river, a large connecting channel. transactions of the american fisheries society 136: 155–166. larson, g.l. & moore, s.e. 1985. encroachment of exotic rainbow trout into stream populations of native brook_trout in the southern appalachian mountains. transactions of the american fisheries society 114: 195–203. mendoza-alfaro, r.e., cudmore, b., r., o., fisher, j.p., contreras-balderas, s., courtenay, w.r.j., koleff-osorio, p., mandrak, n.e., alvarez-torres, p., arroyo-damian, m., escalera-gallardo, c., guevara-sanguines, a., greene, g., lee, d., orbe-mendoza, a., ramirez-martinez, c. & stabri- dis-arana, o. 2009. trinational risk assessment guidelines for aquatic alien invasive species: test cases for the snakeheads (channidae) and armored catﬁshes (loricariidae) in north american inland waters. montreal, qc: commission for environmental cooperation. 100 pp. odenkirk, j. & owens, s. 2005. northern snakeheads in the tidal potomac river system. transactions of the american fisheries society 134: 1605–1609. okland, f., thorstad, e.b., hay, c.j., naesje, t.f. & chanda, b. 2005. patterns of movement and habitat use by tigerﬁsh (hydrocynus vittatus) in the upper zambezi river (namibia). ecology of freshwater fish 14: 79–86. otis, d.l. & white, g.c. 1999. autocorrelation of location estimates and the analysis of radiotracking data. the journal of wildlife management 63: 1039–1044. ott, r.l. & longnecker, m. 2001. an introduction to statistical methods and data analysis, 5th edn. paciﬁc grove, california: wadsworth. 1152 pp. habitat selection by northern snakehead owens, s.j., odenkirk, j.s. & greenlee, r. 2008. northern snakehead movement and distribution in the tidal potomac river system. proceedings of the annual conference of the southeastern association of fish and wildlife agencies 62: 161–167. paukert, c.p. & willis, d.w. 2002. seasonal and diel habitat selection by bluegills in a shallow natural lake. transactions of the american fisheries society 131: 1131–1139. r development core team. 2009. r: a language and environ- ment for statistical computing. r foundation for statistical computing. world wide web electronic publication. avail- able at: http://www.r-project.org (accessed 9 july 2010). sas. 2007. jmp software: release 7.0.1. sas institute inc., cary, north carolina, usa. smith, b.r. & tibbles, j.j. 1980. sea lamprey (petromyzon marinus) in lakes huron, michigan, and superior: history of invasion and control, 1936–78. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 37: 1780–1801. stuart, i.g. & jones, m.j. 2006. movement of common carp, cyprinus carpio, in a regulated lowland australian river: implications for management. fisheries management and ecology 13: 213–219. webb, p.w. & skadsen, j.m. 1980. strike tactics of esox. canadian journal of zoology 58: 1462–1469. werner, e.e., gilliam, j.f., hall, d.j. & mittelbach, g.g. 1983. an experimental test of the effects of predation risk on habitat use in ﬁsh. ecology 64: 1540–1548. winter, j.d. 1996. advances in underwater biotelemetry. in: murphy, b.r. & willis, d.w., eds. fisheries techniques, 2nd edn. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 555–585. 577  