ecology of freshwater fish 2002: 11: 190–195 printed in denmark  all rights reserved copyright # blackwell munksgaard 2002 the inﬂuence of stunted body size on the reproductive ecology of bluegill lepomis macrochirus aday dd, kush cm, wahl dh, philipp dp. the inﬂuence of stunted body size on the reproductive ecology of bluegill lepomis macrochirus. ecology of freshwater fish 2002: 11: 190–195. # blackwell munksgaard, 2002 abstract – although stunting is a common phenomenon in ﬁsh populations, the consequences of stunted body size on the reproductive ecology of individuals has received little attention. the present study compares the reproductive ecology of bluegill in established stunted and non-stunted populations. three ponds (two non-stunted and one stunted) were monitored for spawning activity throughout the summer. parental male bluegill from both non-stunted populations were older, larger, and had greater mating success (number of eggs or fry within nests) than parental males in the stunted population. stunted bluegill also experienced a shortened reproductive season owing to the delay in onset of spawning. the present study demonstrates that individual size and population size structure can have a marked inﬂuence on the reproductive ecology of bluegill. d. d. aday, c. m. kush, d. h. wahl, d. p. philipp program in ecology and evolutionary biology, university of illinois, champaign, il 61820, usa, and center for aquatic ecology, illinois natural history survey, champaign, il 61820, usa present address: department of evolution, ecology and organismal biology, the ohio state university, 1680 university drive, mansfield, oh 44906, usa key words: bluegill; mating success; spawning activity; stunted d. derek aday, program in ecology and evolutionary biology, university of illinois, champaign, il 61820, usa, and center for aquatic ecology, illinois natural history survey, champaign, il 61820, usa; e-mail: daday@uiuc.edu accepted for publication march 26, 2002 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´ s del texto principal de este artı´ culo. introduction stunting is a common phenomenon in ﬁsh popula- tions, and can be the result of a variety of mechan- isms (e.g., swingle & smith 1941; burrough & kennedy 1979; diana 1987). in particular, it has been postulated that stunted body size can result from a decision to mature early relative to the ‘normal’ age and size for the species (burrough & kennedy 1979; l’abe´ e-lund et al. 1990; jansen 1996). for example, an extensive study of bluegill (lepomis macrochirus) populations throughout illinois revealed a signiﬁcant difference in age- at-maturation between populations containing stunted and non-stunted individuals, with stunted males maturing at younger ages and smaller sizes (j.e. claussen, unpublished data). although attention has been given to growth and matura- tion rates of individuals in stunted populations, as with other species, little is known about the reproductive ecology of stunted bluegill and dif- ferences that might exist between stunted and non-stunted individuals. 190 bluegill are important components of fresh- water communities and are numerically dominant in many freshwater lakes throughout north america (werner et al. 1978). the reproductive behaviour of male bluegill is elaborate and quite variable compared to many other ﬁsh species. bluegill are social ﬁshes that nest and spawn in colonies that range from a few individuals to several hundred abutting nests (gross 1982). par- ental males construct bowl-shaped nests in water between 0.1 and 1.5 m deep. following nest con- struction, these males exhibit territorial defence behaviours (e.g., display, thrust, swipe, chase or nip) and courtship behaviours (e.g., rim circling) above and slightly beyond the nest boundary (avila 1976). parental care of offspring is left entirely to the male bluegill, which fan and guard the eggs and fry (gross 1982). a brood-guarding period of up to 10 days typically passes between egg deposition and fry departure, after which parental male bluegill abandon their nests (gross 1982). because of the energetic demands of this reproductive activity, physiological trade-offs in influence of stunted body size on the reproductive ecology of bluegill available energy often result in decreased (or cessation of) growth of mature ﬁsh (roff 1983; 1984). further, fecundity is often directly related to body size (e.g., females, wootton 1979; both sexes, roff 1983). therefore, the reproductive success of individuals within a population could be directly related to the size and the age at which they mature. relative size within a population is an impor- tant factor for determining maturation schedules of parental male bluegill; the presence of large, mature parental males has been shown to inﬂuence the reproductive investment decisions of smaller males (jennings et al. 1997). however, among populations, questions remain regarding differ- ences in reproductive ecology of individual paren- tal males as a function of population size structure. in the present study, we assess the inﬂuence of population size structure on bluegill reproductive ecology by examining variables such as length of spawning season, colony variables (e.g., colony size and success), and mating success of parental male bluegill in stunted (all parental males <160 mm, total length) and non-stunted (all par- ental males >180 mm, total length) populations. study sites several small (<2 ha) ponds in champaign county, illinois, were surveyed by snorkeling and angling during fall 1998 and spring 1999 to determine the species composition and size structure of ﬁsh popu- lations in each pond. categorization of bluegill populations (stunted or non-stunted) was done in accordance with a priori classiﬁcations of bluegill populations throughout illinois (aday et al. 2000; hoxmeier et al. 2001). three ponds were chosen for further study; two ponds (big pond and hedge pond) contained large, non-stunted bluegill, and one (jill pond) contained an historically stunted bluegillpopulation.allpondswerelocatedlessthan 100 m apart, and other than size structure of the bluegill populations the ponds were quite similar; surface areas were approximately 1 ha with similar shape and depth proﬁles, and each was a closed system that received no ﬁshing pressure. the ﬁsh communities were also similar, dominated by blue- gill and largemouth bass (micropterus salmoides), although hedge pond also contained some readear sunﬁsh (lepomis microlophus). materials and methods field and laboratory beginning in may 1999, each pond was monitored for spawning activity by visual inspection from a boat and by snorkeling. the date of formation and location of colonies were recorded on a map of each pond. further, a more detailed map of each colony was constructed, showing the number of individual nests it contained and their spatial arrangement. snorkelers attempted to examine the nests in each colony for eggs; however, owing to heavy volume of spawning activity and rapid egg development, some colonies were not located until fry were present. a numbered tag was placed next to each nest that contained eggs or fry in a colony, and the tag number was recorded on the colony map; untagged nests (i.e., nests without eggs or fry) were simply counted. a brood score for each tagged nest was calculated by scoring the number of eggs or fry on a relative scale of 1 (few) to 5 (many) as per claussen (1991). eggs and fry were scored in the same manner. we did not attempt to quantify the number of eggs or fry that corresponded with each score because we were interested in relative mating success; egg and fry scores can, however, be used to measure absolute mating success (claussen 1991). all nests were scored by the same two investigators throughout the summer to ensure consistent, pre- cise measurement. a method was derived called the colony suc- cess index (csi) for calculating the mating success of male bluegill in each colony, which was deter- mined as follows: csi ¼ number o nests with brood  mean brood score number of nests built this index was calculated for each bluegill colony in big pond and jill pond. the presence of congeners prevented the use of csi in our com- parisons with hedge pond because many bluegill colonies also contained some nesting redear. parental male bluegill exhibiting nest-guarding behaviour were angled from nests by a snorkeler carefully ﬂoating above the colony. fishing line tied to a 2-ft section of a ﬁshing pole was used to dangle a hook baited with an earthworm above the nest of a targeted ﬁsh. caution was taken to avoid disturbing the substrate. once the ﬁsh was hooked, the snorkeler handed the ﬁsh to a second researcher in a boat. total length (mm) and weight (g) of each captured male was recorded and scales were removed for age analysis. in addition, the upper caudal ﬁn of each captured ﬁsh was clipped to indicate that the ﬁsh had been collected and data recorded. a unique series of clips of anal and dorsal spines were given to represent the colony from which the ﬁsh was collected (e.g., the ﬁrst dorsal spine was clipped on a ﬁsh from colony one, the ﬁrst dorsal and ﬁrst anal spines were clipped on a ﬁsh from colony 11, etc.). the ﬁsh were returned to 191 aday et al. their nests as soon as all data were collected, and the handling time was kept to a minimum. because of potential for egg predation by other ﬁsh, the snor- keler remained in the water above the nest to protect the brood. in hedge pond, individuals were identiﬁed as a bluegill, redear, or hybrid based on visual assess- ment of colour patterns. this was done to ensure that only bluegill were used in the analysis. blue- gill are easily distinguished by large, elongated opercular tabs that are dark to the margin (robin- son & buchanan 1992). bluegill also have a distinc- tive dark spot near the posterior margin of the dorsal ﬁn. redear, conversely, have smaller oper- cular tabs with a red margin and no dorsal ﬁn spot (robinson & buchanan 1992). to determine suc- cess of ﬁeld identiﬁcation, a small sample of bluegill, redear, and suspected hybrids were collected and taken to the laboratory for genetic analyses. for these analyses we used protein electrophoresis to examine several diagnostic protein loci (pgm-a, mdh-b, and pgdh-a) that exhibit ﬁxed allelic differences between the two species. laboratory scales taken from ﬁsh were pressed on acetate slides and read with a microﬁche machine. the age of each ﬁsh was determined by counting the number of annuli on each scale (regier 1962). to insure accu- racy of age determination, the age of each ﬁsh was determined independently by at least two readers. we determined the condition of each individual based on total length and weight measurements taken in the ﬁeld. the condition factor was deter- mined according to the following equation: k ¼ w l3  105 where w is weight (g) and l the total length (mm). statistical analyses analysis of variance (anova) was used to assess differences in length, weight, age, condition, and brood score among populations (proc glm, sas institute inc. 1989). post hoc comparisons were made with tukey’s multiple comparisons tests. values were considered signiﬁcantly differ- ent at p < 0.05. treatment means and standard errors were determined with the proc glm (sas institute inc. 1989) procedure. results bluegill characteristics field identiﬁcation of bluegill was easily done in hedge pond. genetic analyses indicated that all bluegill and all hybrids were correctly identiﬁed, but two ﬁsh identiﬁed in the ﬁeld as redear were actually hybrids. parental male bluegill in both non-stunted populations were signiﬁcantly larger (total length and weight; p < 0.0001) and older (p < 0.0001) than parental male bluegill in the stunted population (table 1), validating our ori- ginal assessment of population size structure. parental male bluegill from big pond also exhib- ited signiﬁcantly higher (p < 0.0001) condition factors than parental males in the stunted popula- tion (table 1). parental males from hedge pond, however, exhibited similar condition factors to the parental male bluegill in the stunted popula- tion (table 1), suggesting that competition with congeners may decrease condition in parental male bluegill. nesting characteristics/mating success spawning seasons were quite different in all three populations. parental male bluegill in big pond spawned early and for a total of 18 days (18 table1. mean (se) total length, weight, condition, age, egg score, colony size, number of nests per colony with brood, and colony success index (csi) for non-stunted (big pond and hedge pond) and stunted (jill pond) parental male bluegill. big pond (non-stunted) hedge pond (non-stunted) jill pond (stunted) length (mm) weight (g) condition (k) age (years) brood score colony size nests with brood/colony csi mean 183.7a (1.09) 139.5a (3.49) 2.24a (0.04) 4.4a (0.11) 3.2 a (7.90) 35.0 (7.90) 11.3 (2.80) 1.05 (0.18) n 32 32 32 30 9 9 9 9 mean 198.1b (0.71) 150.7b (2.04) 1.92b (0.02) 3.5b (0.07) 2.4b (0.08) na na na n 117 105 105 107 223 32.1 5.10 0.13 mean 152.6c (1.07) 70.3c (1.80) 1.96b (0.02) 2.3c (0.08) 0.79c (0.07) (5.90) (1.58) (0.04) n 36 36 35 35 78 11 11 11 p-value 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 0.77 0.05 0.0001 owing to mixed colonies of bluegill, redear, and hybrids,we were unable to calculate mean colony size, nests with brood/colony, and csi values for hedge pond.nindicates the number of individuals or colonies sampled for each metric. different letters in superscript (a, b, c) within a row indicate significant differences (p< 0.05); p-values were generated from analysis of variance (anova). 192 influence of stunted body size on the reproductive ecology of bluegill fig. 1. number of new colonies con- structed during weekly intervals from may 14 to july 30 in big and hedge ponds (non-stunted bluegill) and jill pond (stunted bluegill). may 4 june), whereas parental male bluegill in the stunted population initiated spawning much later and spawned over a longer period (33 days: 7 june–july 9; fig. 1). the spawning season in the second non-stunted population, hedge pond, overlapped that of the other two populations and lasted 61 days (20 may 19 july; fig. 1). likely because of the longer spawning season, the number of colonies containing parental male bluegill in hedge pond (39) far exceeded the number of bluegill colonies formed in the other non-stunted population (9). overall, 9 colonies with 315 nests formed in big pond and 11 colonies with 353 nests formed in jill pond, so the average colony size was not signiﬁ- cantly different between these two populations (p¼ 0.77; table 1). however, the number of nests per colony that received brood was signiﬁcantly higher (p¼ 0.05) in the non-stunted population than in the stunted population, resulting in a signiﬁcantly higher mean csi value in big pond (table 1). because hedge pond contained mixed colonies of bluegill, redear, and hybrids, the bluegill colony metrics (number of nests with brood per colony, colony size and csi) could not be deter- mined for this population. however, brood scores for parental male bluegill were different among all three populations (p < 0.0001; table 1); brood scores were higher in both non-stunted populations than in the stunted population (p < 0.05). discussion previous investigations have measured reproduc- tive investment of different-sized ﬁshes within a population (l’abe´ e-lund et al. 1990; jansen 1996; jennings et al. 1997). usually, this has been done by quantifying gonadosomatic indices (ratio 193 aday et al. of gonad weight to body weight) of individuals to estimate reproductive investment. no studies, however, have examined directly the effects of population size structure on mating success among populations. our results suggest that the size structure of bluegill populations can inﬂuence the reproductive ecology of individual males. there were several apparent differences in reproductive ecology between bluegill in the stunted and non-stunted populations. parental male bluegill in the stunted population had lower mating success than bluegill in both non-stunted populations. consequently, csi values were sig- niﬁcantly lower in the stunted population. at least two potential factors may contribute to the low brood scores observed for parental males in the stunted population. the ﬁrst and most likely explanation is that fecundity increases with age and size (roff 1983). females in the stunted population likely had fewer eggs to deposit than those in the non-stunted populations, which translated to decreased brood scores for parental males in the stunted population. brood predation may also have contributed to low brood scores in the stunted population. small bluegill represent signiﬁcant sources of predation on eggs (dominey 1981). however, egg predation is likely a source of brood loss in each of our populations, as egg predation by large bluegill and hybrid sunﬁsh is also common (gross & macmillan 1981). because we were unable to quantify brood pre- dation in our populations, we cannot assess whether or not this mechanism may be respon- sible for differences in brood scores of our stunted and non-stunted populations. however, brood predation by conspeciﬁcs appeared to be consis- tent among populations. the spawning season of bluegill in the stunted population started later than in both non-stunted populations. within a population, smaller ﬁsh emerge from winter with lower lipid reserves, and therefore, less energy available for spawning than their larger counterparts (justus & fox 1994). the delay in onset of spawning in the stunted population could result from the necessity of acquiring adequate energy reserves for spawn- ing activity. late-starting, shortened breeding seasons have also been found in birds exhibiting early maturity (stearns 1976). also unusual was the abbreviated spawning season in non-stunted big pond. extremely high growth of the macro- phyte duckweed (lemna minor), which completely covered big pond by the second week of june, may explain this result. the macrophyte cover was approximately 12-mm thick throughout the pond, resulting in no light penetration below the surface. peak spawning in both non-stunted 194 populations occurred during the second week (4–11) of june. in the absence of dense macro- phyte cover, spawning likely would have contin- ued in big pond in a similar manner to hedge pond, and similar to other non-stunted populations throughout illinois (d. aday, unpublished data). smaller size and decreased mating success of stunted individuals could be due to density-depen- dent mechanisms. densities of mature individuals appeared similar in each population, but inacces- sibility for boat electroﬁshing and large-scale seining made it impossible to determine total ﬁsh densities. density-dependent slow growth has been implicated in studies of bluegill (e.g., swingle & smith 1941; murnyak et al. 1985), and could be responsible for size of bluegill observed in the stunted population. it seems less likely, however, that differences in density would be responsible for variation in nesting success of males among populations. mean colony size for the two populations in which only bluegill were present (big pond and jill pond) was similar (35 vs. 32 nests per colony), yet the non-stunted males were signiﬁcantly more successful. further, the mixed colonies in hedge pond were much larger (average colony size¼ 71 nests) than the other two populations. despite this, parental male bluegill in hedge pond experienced higher mating success than those in the stunted population. these results provide some evidence that differences in densities were not responsible for differences in mating success of individual parental males in these two populations. the smaller bluegill exhibit complex social structures and tremendous variation in life-history characteris- tics such as growth rate, and age- and size-at- maturation. as the result of a variety of potential mechanisms, individual bluegill often exhibit stun- ted body size. our results demonstrate that varia- tion in the size of mature individuals can inﬂuence their reproductive ecology through changes in timing and duration of spawning season and mating success of individuals. as a consequence, we suggest that population size structure is an important variable that should be considered in conservation and management initiatives. resumen 1. aunque el feno´ meno de ‘stunting’ (o reduccio´ n del taman˜ o por crecimiento inhibido) es comu´ n en las pobla- ciones de peces, sus consecuencias sobre la ecologı´ a repro- ductiva de los individuos ha recibido poca atencio´ n. este estudio compara la ecologı´ a reproductiva entre poblaciones stunted y no stunted de lepomis macrochirus. esta es una especie socialmente compleja que hace nidos coloniales donde interacciones con machos maduros pueden inﬂuenciar las estrategias biolo´ gicas de machos juveniles. el ﬁn de este influence of stunted body size on the reproductive ecology of bluegill estudio fue determinar el e´ xito reproductivo de los pequen˜ os machos ‘stunted’ respecto de los machos ‘no-stunted’. la actividad reproductiva fue monitorizada en tres lagunas (dos ‘stunted’ y una ‘no-stunted’) durante el verano. 2. nidos de machos individuales fueron examinados en cada poblacio´ n y el e´ xito de nidaje de los machos individuales fue determinado cuantiﬁcando el nu´ mero de huevos o juveniles en cada nido. los machos parentales de ambas poblaciones ‘no-stunted’ fueron mayores en edad y taman˜ o y tuvieron mayor e´ xito cuantiﬁcado como el nu´ mero de huevos o juveniles en el nido que los machos parentales de la poblacio´ n ‘stunted’. estos u´ ltimos tambien experimentaron una esta- cio´ n reproductiva mas corta debido a un retraso en el comienzo de la reproduccio´ n. este estudio demuestra que el taman˜ o individual y la estructura de taman˜ os de la poblacio´ n puede tener una inﬂuencia marcada sobre la ecologı´ a reproductiva de l. macrochirus. acknowledgments we appreciate the ﬁeld assistance of vicki ursitti, dondrae coble, julie claussen, cory suski, brock mccarty, and todd kassler. in addition, todd kassler provided valuable assistance with genetic analyses. this paper beneﬁted from the comments of the aquatic ecology discussion group at the kaskaskia biological station, john hoxmeier, and two anonymous reviewers. s. steuwe and l. dunham helped coordinate activities with the illinois department of natural resources (idnr). funding for this investigation was pro- vided in part by the environmental council at the university of illinois and the federal aid in sport fish restoration act under project f-128-r administered by the idnr. references aday, d.d., claussen, j.e., hoxmeier, j.h., edison, t.w., philipp, d.p. & wahl, d.h. 2000. quality management of bluegill: factors affecting population size structure. annual progress report, inhs. aquatic ecology tech- nical report 99/1. avila, v.l. 1976. a field study of nesting behaviour of male bluegill sunfish (lepomis macrochirus rafinesque). american midland naturalist 96: 195–206. burrough, r.j. & kennedy, c.r. 1979. the occurrence and natural alleviation of stunting in a population of roach, rutilus rutilus (l.). journal of fish biology 15: 93–109. claussen, j.e. 1991. annual variation in the reproductive activity of a bluegill population: effect of clutch size and temperature. masters’ thesis. university of toronto, toronto. 105 pp. diana, j.s. 1987. simulation of mechanisms causing stunting in northern pike populations. transactions of the american fisheries society 116: 612–617. dominey, w.j. 1981. anti-predator function of bluegill sunfish nesting colonies. nature 290: 586–588. gross, m.r. 1982. sneakers, satellites and parentals: polymorphic mating strategies in north american sun- fishes. z. tierpsychol 60: 1–26. gross, m.r. & macmillan, a.m. 1981. predation and the evolution of colonial nesting in bluegill sunfish (lepomis macrochirus). behavioral ecology and sociobiology 8: 163–174. hoxmeier, j.h., aday, d.d. & wahl, d.h. 2001. factors influencing precision of age estimation from scales and otoliths of bluegills in illinois reservoirs. north american journal of fisheries management 21: 374–380. jansen, w.a. 1996. plasticity in maturity of yellow perch, perca flavescens (mitchill): comparisons of stunted and normal-growing populations. annals zoology fennici. 30: 403–415. jennings, m.j., claussen, j.e. & philipp, d.p. 1997. effect of population size structure on reproductive investment of male bluegill. north american journal of fisheries management 17: 516–524. justus, j. & fox, m.j. 1994. the cost of early maturation on growth, body condition, and somatic lipid content in a lake pumpkinseed (lepomis gibbosus) population. ecol- ogy of freshwater fish 3: 9–17. l’abe´ e-lund, j.h., jensen, a.j. & johnsen, b.o. 1990. interpopulation variation in male parr maturation of anadromous brown_trout in norway. canadian journal of zoology 68: 1983–1987. (salmo_trutta) murnyak, d.f., murnyak, m.o. & wolgast, l.j. 1985. growth of stunted and non-stunted bluegill sunfish in ponds. progressive fish culturalist 46(2): 133–138. regier, h.a. 1962. validation of the scale method for estimating age and growth of bluegills. transactions of the american fisheries society 91: 362–374. robinson, h.w. & buchanan, t.m. 1992. fishes of arkansas. fayetteville, ar: university of arkansas press. roff, d.a. 1983. an allocation model of growth and reproduction in fish. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 40: 1395–1404. roff, d.a. 1984. the evolution of life history parameters in teleosts. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 41: 989–1000. sas institute inc. 1989. sas/stat user’s guide, version 6, 4th edn. cary, north carolina: sas institute. stearns, s.c. 1976. life history tactics: a review of the ideas. quarterly review of biology 51: 3–47. swingle, h.s. & smith, e.v. 1941. the management of ponds with stunted fish populations. transactions of the american fisheries society 71: 102–105. werner, e.e., hall, d.j. & werner, m.d. 1978. littoral zone fish communities of two florida lakes and a comparison with michigan lakes. environmental biology of fishes 3: 163–172. wootton, r.j. 1979. energy cost of egg production and environmental determinants of fecundity in teleost fishes. symposium zoological society of london 44: 133–159. 195  