accepted: 4 september 2016 doi: 10.1111/eff.12319 o r i g i n a l a r t i c l e fish nursery habitat function of the main channel, floodplain tributaries and oxbow lakes of a medium- sized river christopher j naus1 | s. reid adams1 1department of biology, university of central arkansas, conway, ar, usa correspondence s. reid adams, department of biology, university of central arkansas, conway, ar, usa. email: radams@uca.edu present address christopher j naus, arkansas department of environmental quality, north little rock, ar, usa funding information university of central arkansas abstract small, adventitious tributaries (<3 orders of magnitude smaller than the stream it flows into) are a conspicuous feature of many river–floodplain systems, but their value as fish reproduction and nursery habitat is not well understood compared to oxbow lakes and the main river channel (mrc). moreover, connectivity of tributaries to the mrc is often less impacted by anthropogenic modifications (e.g., dams and levees) compared to oxbow lakes. from april to july 2012, larval and juvenile fish were collected in the fourche lafave river (arkansas, usa) system to better understand fish nursery habi- tat function of tributaries relative to oxbow lakes and the mrc. nonmetric multidi- mensional scaling ordination of juvenile and larval fish genera revealed distinct fish assemblages in mrc and floodplain habitats. ordination of juvenile fish at the species level resulted in distinct fish assemblages in tributary versus oxbow lake habitats. tributaries had more unique species and higher abundance of shared species than oxbow lakes and mrc. additionally, of the 46 species identified, all but six were col- lected in lower tributary reaches. connectivity was strongly associated with both ordi- nations and was important in describing patterns of fish variation among habitats and between tributaries. of the tributaries sampled, the least fragmented stream had the most similar fish assemblages between upper and lower sections. findings of this study revealed tributaries are an important, yet overlooked, feature in the river–flood- plain model. especially in years of drought, channel–floodplain connectivity can be limited, but tributaries can be used by fishes for reproduction and nursery habitat. k e y w o r d s adventitious stream, connectivity, larval fish, light trap, mini-fyke net, river floodplain, stream barriers 1 |  introduction river–floodplain systems are comprised of the main river channel and adjacent low- flow habitats ranging from permanently connected tribu- tary confluences and backwaters to seasonally connected lakes, wet- lands and adjacent inundated land (welcomme, 1979; baker, killgore, & kasul, 1991). these complex ecosystems undergo seasonal flooding that facilitates exchange of nutrients and biota between main channel and floodplain habitats, mediated by timing, duration and extent of flooding and degree of hydrologic connection a habitat maintains to the main river channel (junk, bayley, & sparks, 1989; bayley, 1995, janáč et al., 2010). floodplain habitats are well known to be important for repro- duction of river–floodplain fishes, often enhancing growth and recruit- ment of offspring due to increased invertebrate biomass and favourable environmental characteristics (e.g., warmer temperatures and increased cover) (sheaffer & nickum, 1986;  ribeiro, crain, & moyle, 2004; csoboth & garvey, 2008). heterogeneity of physicochemical character- istics across floodplain habitats, including connectivity with the main 4  |   wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:4–18. © 2016 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus channel, results in spatial variability in assemblage patterns of both adult and young- of- year fishes (mérigoux & ponton, 1999; csoboth & garvey, 2008; górski, winter, de leeum, minin, & nagelkerke, 2010; gogola, sanches, gubiani, & da silva, 2013). however, relatively more research has focused on distribution and requirements of older fish life stages within river–floodplains, likely due to difficulties in capturing and identifying larval and age 0+ fishes (holland, 1986; copp & peňáz, 1988). identification and characterisation of important fish nursery hab- itats within the complex spatial mosaic of river–floodplain systems are essential given the global threats to these ecosystems and fish faunas (nilsson, reidy, dynesius, & revenga, 2005). oxbow lakes, prominent floodplain features of lowland rivers worldwide, are well established as important fish spawning and nurs- ery habitats (welcomme, 1979; penczak et al., 2004). previous re- search has elucidated the influence of environmental characteristics (i.e., connectivity, depth, size, dissolved oxygen concentration, tur- bidity and water temperature) on ecosystem processes and structure of fish assemblages in oxbow lakes (winemiller, tarim, shormann, & cotner, 2000; penczak et al., 2004; miranda, 2005; zeug, winemiller, & tarim, 2005; miyazono, aycock, miranda, & tietjen, 2010). younger oxbow lakes have characteristics that facilitate exchange of nutrients and biota during flood pulses; they are often close to the main river channel and have relatively high connectivity and greater depth, at- tributes associated with higher fish species richness and abundance (winemiller et al., 2000; miranda, 2005; zeug et al., 2005; goetz, miranda, kröger, & andrews, 2015). as oxbow lakes age, annual flood events and channel migration often lead to shallow, isolated water- bodies with physicochemical conditions (e.g., low dissolved oxygen and high temperatures) (winemiller et al., 2000; penczak et al., 2004) that adversely affect fish survival and lower fish richness and abun- dance. in natural systems, new oxbow lakes are periodically formed; however, anthropogenic activities (e.g., channelisation, dams, dikes and levees) have altered natural riverine processes of erosion and deposition and slowed water velocities during flood pulses, leading to few or no new oxbow lakes being created along most medium to large rivers (welcomme, 1979; bayley, 1995; miranda, 2005). oxbow lakes existing in altered river–floodplain systems are often in ad- vanced stages of succession, providing unpredictable (i.e., possibility of desiccation) and/or unsuitable habitats for river–floodplain fishes (winemiller et al., 2000), and connections to the main channel are disrupted, restricting fish access. consequently, the ability of oxbow lakes in altered river systems to meet the reproductive and recruit- ment needs of river–floodplain fishes is increasingly compromised. similar to oxbow lakes, floodplain tributaries are permanently in- undated waterbodies in the riverscape that potentially function as fish nursery habitat. tributaries connect the main river channel to the floodplain and can be primary corridors for fish movement onto the floodplain (welcomme, 1979), especially in leveed systems. these smaller, often adventitious, streams are mostly linear, lentic environs, generally only having measurable water velocity for brief periods fol- lowing local rainfall or in response to fluctuations in the main channel. upstream ponding or retention of water during low water seasons can be caused by the american beaver (castor canadensis), road crossings     |  5 or other anthropogenic activities (inebnit, 2009). despite their preva- lence in river–floodplain ecosystems, little research has characterised the importance of tributaries as fish spawning and nursery habitat. the few studies that have considered this habitat type were mostly re- stricted to the lower reaches. however, they discovered tributaries can provide important nursery function for river–floodplain fishes. brown and coon (1994) found most larval and juvenile fish taxa studied were collected in higher densities in tributaries of the missouri river relative to the main channel; the authors speculated the value of tributaries to floodplain and channel fishes have increased with the loss of back- water habitat along the missouri river, usa. similarly, mérigoux and ponton (1999) identified that more than 60% of fishes in the sinnamary river, french guiana, used tributaries as nurseries. the value of flood- plain tributaries as fish habitat within river–floodplains, especially as nursery habitat, is not well documented, but they could have increased importance in modified rivers as other habitats are lost, degraded or no longer accessible to main channel fishes (sensu brown & coon, 1994). most river–floodplain systems in the world have been altered by watershed land use changes, construction of dams and levees and channelisation resulting in altered connectivity and flooding regimes (galat & zueimüller, 2001; tockner & stanford, 2002; nilsson et al., 2005) that have undoubtedly impacted recruitment of river–floodplain fishes. it is paramount to understand how different river habitats con- tribute to life cycles of riverine fishes to conserve this diversity. the overarching premise of this research was to evaluate the importance of a relatively unstudied habitat type, small adventitious floodplain tributaries, as fish nursery habitat. these habitats have been identified as spawning and rearing locations of alligator gar (atractosteus spatula) (inebnit, 2009; kluender, adams, & lewis, 2016), and we hypothesised that tributaries were providing nursery habitat for a diversity of river– floodplain fishes. a replicated field experiment compared young- of- year fish assemblages in oxbow lakes, floodplain tributaries and main channel habitat in a medium- sized river. specific objectives were (i) to characterise and compare larval and juvenile fish assemblages in the main river channel and two permanently inundated floodplain habi- tats (oxbow lakes and tributaries) and (ii) to study how connectivity to the main channel influences fish assemblages among river–floodplain habitats and within tributary habitats (upstream and downstream of semipermeable barriers). we hypothesised that there would be dis- tinct larval and juvenile fish assemblages in each habitat (main river channel, lower tributary, upper tributary and oxbow lakes) and that these differences would be associated with unique physicochemical conditions and varying degrees of connectivity of habitats to the main river channel. connectivity should influence the distributions and movements of adult fishes and thus spawning and nursery locations within the river–floodplain mosaic. 2 |  methods 2.1 | study area the fourche lafave river (flr) is a 5th- order river (watershed area = 2,885.8 km2) in arkansas (ar), usa, that originates in the 6  |     ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus figure 1 lower fourche lafave river (arkansas, usa) showing locations of the four main river channel sites, three oxbow lakes and four tributaries sampled for juvenile and larval fishes with mini- fyke nets and light traps from april 2012 to july 2012. tributaries were further separated into upper and lower sections. lower tributary sections (4) were downstream of the first barrier, and upper tributary sections (3) were upstream of the last barrier moving upstream from the confluence with the main channel ouachita national forest and flows eastward for approximately 230 river kilometres (rkm) to its confluences with arkansas river pool 7 (figure 1). lake nimrod, the only flood- control reservoir on the flr, was formed by the completion of nimrod dam in 1942 and is lo- cated approximately 100 rkm upstream from the confluence with the arkansas river. annual discharge from 2002 to 2013 averaged 36.7 cubic metres per second at aplin, ar, located 80 rkm from the conflu- ence with the arkansas river (u. s. geological survey 2014). the flr from the headwaters to lake nimrod and downstream of lake nimrod to aplin resembles a typical wadeable, upland stream characterised by coarse substrates and alternating riffles and pools becoming deeper downstream. land use within the flr watershed above aplin is pri- marily forest. the flr downstream from aplin to the confluence with the arkansas river is characterised by a meandering channel (~40  metres (m) wide on average), deeper water (average 4.57 metres (m) at houston, ar from 1987–2012) and finer substrates. flr below aplin has an unleveed floodplain up to 8 km wide with a predominant land use of agriculture, but a 15 to 20- m forested riparian buffer re- mains along much of the channel (kluender et al., 2016). typical flood- ing of the lower flr system corresponds with high discharge in the arkansas river that results in backflow into the flr and occurs be- tween late winter/early spring and mid- summer. flood duration of a single event is usually less than 14 days, but has been observed to last up to 38 days (inebnit, 2009). although land use patterns and dams (i.e., nimrod dam and arkansas river locks and dams) have affected floodplain habitat and hydrology, the flr below aplin continues to have features characteristic of an unaltered river such as high channel sinuosity, high amounts of large wood within the channel and periodic seasonal connection with its unleveed floodplain (welcomme, 1979). floodplain of the flr downstream of aplin, ar, contains both per- manent and seasonally available habitat for fishes with varying levels of hydrologic connection with the main river channel. approximately 13 oxbow lakes (ol) exist along the lower flr. these lakes are rel- atively small (1.2–3.76 hectares), shallow (<1 m deep), densely vege- tated and mostly resembled wetlands; however, seven lakes maintain open- water habitat. all oxbows appear to be in advanced stages of succession, and three oxbow lakes were chosen for study based on ac- cessibility and presence of open- water habitat and “lake- like” features most characteristic of other fish/oxbow lake studies. study lakes were relatively small (2.32–3.76 hectares) and located in proximity to the main channel (0.10–0.97 km). devil’s elbow oxbow has a channel pro- viding intermittent connection with the main river channel; the other two lakes are only connected during over land flooding. in addition to oxbow lakes, lowland adventitious tributaries (1st–2nd order) were a conspicuous floodplain habitat (~20 in lower flr). four adventitious tributaries were chosen for study based on their large relative size, position within the flr floodplain and previous observations of use by channel and floodplain fishes. floodplain tributaries are mostly low- gradient, lentic environs, only having measurable downstream flow immediately following local rain events and in response to main stem fluctuations. during flood events, water from the flr channel flows back into the tributaries, flooding areas adjacent to them. both ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus     |  7 table 1 names and connectivity characteristics of 14 sites sampled in the fourche lafave river system during 2012 distance to mrc (m) number of barriers barrier type barrier height (m) gauge height for connection (m) days connected to mrc 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 2 1 1 1 – – – – – – – – 5.1 4.3 5.3 5.2 4.0 8.5* 147 147 147 147 147 147 147 147 37 49 35 35 6 4 gravel fords concret slab concrete slab (culvert) land land land 0.1 (0.2) 0.8 0.4 (0.54) 0.4 2.3 5.1 dci 100 connectivity rank 10.5 100 10.5 100 10.5 100 10.5 100 100 100 100 10.5 10.5 10.5 10.5 88.29 74.57 5 6 68.92 3.5 – – – 3.5 2 1 site abbr. mrc0 mrc11 mrc21 mrc155 lcc lcc lmc lrc ucc urc 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,576 1,371 umc 2,735 dbol hol 970 102 h155ol 267 site main river channel rkm 0–10 main river channel rkm 11–20 main river channel rkm 21–30 main river channel near aplin, ar lower caney creek lower lawson creek lower mill creek lower rankin creek upper caney creek upper rankin creek upper west fork mill creek devil’s bend oxbow lake heifer ranch oxbow lake hwy 155 oxbow lake barrier heights on tributaries were calculated as distance from stream bottom to top of barrier during low- flow conditions (value in parentheses is height of most upstream barrier). barrier height for oxbow lakes was measured as the change in elevation from the main river channel at base flow to the lowest elevation required to reconnect. dendritic connectivity index (dci) was a measure of stream fragmentation calculated with stream length and barrier permeability. *calculated using gauge at aplin, ar. oxbow lakes and floodplain tributaries reside within a mostly agricul- turalised floodplain matrix, with a riparian buffer around most habitats. seasonally inundated floodplain habitats (mostly agriculture fields) were not sampled due to the brevity of inundation during the study. 2.2 | sampling scheme sampling was conducted in the main channel, oxbow lakes and adven- titious tributaries from highway 155 bridge near aplin, ar (34°57′n, 92°59′w), to the confluence of mill creek and the fourche lafave river near bigelow, ar (34°59′n, 92°39′w). three oxbow lakes (ol), four adventitious tributaries and four randomly chosen main river channel (mrc) reaches (1,000 m long) were sampled monthly from april 2012 through july 2012 to encompass the larval and early ju- venile stages of most flr fishes (figure 1, table 1). tributaries were further separated into lower and upper reaches a priori to account for potential longitudinal differences in fish assemblages that might be associated with fragmentation from the presence of semipermeable 8  |     barriers (e.g., road crossings and culverts) (warren & pardew, 1998;  perkins & gido, 2012). four lower tributary sites (lt) were designated from 100 m upstream from the confluence with the flr to the first potential upstream semipermeable barrier (571–1,368 m). the im- mediate confluence of tributaries with the main channel flr was not included to minimise local effects of eddies and short- distance daily movements between habitats. upper tributary sites (ut) were the most upstream reach of stream (332–833 m) above the last road crossing but still within the flr floodplain. there were three ut sites because an earthen berm constructed across lawson creek prevented any fish passage; other tributary barriers are semipermeable, allowing fish passage at specific water levels (table 1). fish were sampled with two passive gears previously used by other researchers to sample young fishes in river–floodplain systems. mini- fyke nets (0.6 × 1.2 m; 4.6 m lead, 3.1 mm mesh) and plexiglass light traps (30- cm × 30- cm × 15- cm) were used to sample juvenile and larval fish respectively. juvenile fish collected in light traps were retained for analyses. mini- fyke nets are commonly used to sample small- bodied fish in littoral zones and were found by clark, jackson, and lochmann (2007) to yield higher species richness and diversity than seine nets. light traps were a plexiglass floating quatrefoil slotted trap (5 mm slots) illuminated with a cyalume yellow 12- hr light stick and effec- tively sample fish larvae in river–floodplain systems and shallow littoral zones (turner, trexler, miller, & toyer, 1994; killgore & baker, 1996). sampling gear was deployed across time periods and sites using a standardised approach. light traps were deployed monthly in all four- teen sites from april to july 2012, with the exception of two sites that were not sampled in april (mrc155 and llc). during monthly sam- ples, each site received six light traps evenly dispersed throughout the site and between near- shore and off- shore habitats; therefore, total light trap effort was 24 trap nights for most sites. over the course of the study, six traps were stranded overnight by decreasing water lev- els and were excluded from analyses. both starting location (upstream or downstream) and trap location (near shore or off shore) were ran- domly selected using the second hand of a watch. light traps were de- ployed before sunset and collected the following morning after sunrise. contents of light traps were filtered through a 505- μm ichthyoplank- ton net and immediately preserved in 5% formalin. all ten floodplain sites were sampled with three mini- fyke nets per sampling period during may, june and july for a total effort of nine trap nights per site. they were not used to sample main channel sites because steep banks hindered their proper deployment and compromised effective- ness. mini- fyke nets were dispersed evenly throughout sites and were set perpendicular to shore in the evening and collected the following morning. all sets were along shallow, vegetated shorelines where the lead line reached the bottom and the cab was at least slightly out of the water. juvenile and larval fishes were fixed in 10% formalin and taken to the laboratory for identification. for both mini- fyke nets and light traps, three to four sites representing most if not all habitat types were randomly sampled per night until all sites had been sampled within a month to minimise systematic error due to sampling sequence. despite efforts to have a standard approach that maximised sam- pling effectiveness, we were concerned with how effectiveness of gears ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus varied given sites represented a range in width, depth, and turbidity, factors known to influence sampling (peterson & paukert, 2009). an a posteriori species accumulation analysis was conducted across sites and sampling periods for each gear to assess relative effectiveness of capturing species at sites and determine whether systematic ineffi- ciencies were present (i.e., was bias strong and limited to a certain habitat type). species rarefaction, including an estimate of asymptotic richness, was conducted using inext package in r (hsieh, ma, & chao, 2015), and models were constructed for each site using individual- based abundances as outlined in chao et al. (2014). proportion of spe- cies captured (number observed/asymptotic richness) was used as an indicator of sampling effectiveness, and values were relatively high for fyke nets (0.71–1.0) and light traps (0.62–1.0). mean proportions of species captured per habitat type with fyke nets were relatively similar (ol—0.79; lt—0.85; ut—0.87); values for light traps were more vari- able but remained high (ol—0.90; lt—0.83; ut—0.78; mrc—0.88). further, proportion of species captured was not correlated (pearson’s r) with depth, width or turbidity for fyke nets or light traps (all r < 0.3). these analyses suggested that the impacts of potential differences in sampling effectiveness across habitats were minimal and our sampling scheme was successful at sampling fishes vulnerable to the gear types. additionally, rare species were omitted from ordination analyses, fur- ther minimising impacts of species detection issues. 2.3 | habitat assessment point- in- time environmental data were collected at each light trap to examine correlations between fish assemblages and site- level physicochemical attributes. variables measured were dissolved oxygen (mg/l), temperature (c˚) (ysi model 550a, yellow springs instruments, yellow springs, oh), ph, specific conductivity (μs) (pcs testr 35, oakton instruments, vernon hills, il), depth (m) (speedtech depthmate portable sounder, great falls, va), turbid- ity (nephelometric turbidity unit (ntu)) and instream cover (ordinal scale 0–5). to measure turbidity, 10 ml of water was collected at each trap and analysed with a hach 2100p turbidimeter. instream cover [all available woody (e.g., stumps, cypress knees and fallen logs) and vegetated cover (e.g., ludwigia, justicia and polygonum)] was measured as a relative density and assigned values ranging from 0 (no cover) to 5 (dense); instream cover methods were adapted from scheidegger and bain (1995). site width (m) was measured with a bushnell range pro laser rangefinder (overland park, ks) at three equally spaced tran- sects. water velocity was not measured in any sites, as they rarely had detectable flow. 2.4 | habitat connectivity number of days a site was connected to the main river channel was determined for floodplain sites by both direct observation and quan- tification of controlling point elevation/river stage relationships using arcgis (version 10.3, environmental services research, inc, redlands, ca, usa) and river hydrograph data. water- level data were acquired from united states geological survey (usgs) gauge stations on the ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus flr at houston, ar (state hwy 216) and aplin, ar (state hwy 155), to describe main river channel hydrology and determine days each floodplain site was connected to the main river channel. light detec- tion and ranging files (lidar) were used to determine minimum eleva- tions water levels had to reach for connection to occur for each site; this elevation was subtracted from the houston gauge zero elevation (240.26 m). estimated stage for connections was verified by personal observations of connection and digital photographs (google earth and usgs data), and stages represented conservative estimates of con- nection. for analyses, number of days connected with the main chan- nel from march 1, 2012, to july 25, 2012, was calculated for each site and ranked, and ties were averaged. additionally, dendritic connectiv- ity indices (dci) were calculated for each upper tributary site using methods of potadromous fish movement described in cote, kehler, bourne, and wiersma’s (2009) study. this method was used to address potential effects road crossings had on structuring fish assemblages within and among tributaries using stream length, number of barriers and barrier permeability. barrier permeability was calculated as aver- age inverse barrier height (measured from stream bottom to top of barrier during base flow). values ranged from 0 to 1, with 0 represent- ing no connection (table 1). final dci values ranged from 0 to 100, with 100 representing a completely unfragmented stream network. all dci values were calculated in r statistical program version 2.11.1 using code obtained from dr. david cote (senior ecologist, amec). 2.5 | data analyses fish were identified to the lowest taxonomic level possible using diag- nostic characteristics published in a number of resources (auer, 1982; fuiman et al., 1983; wallus, simon, & yeager, 1990; kay, wallus, & yeager, 1994; wallus, kay, & simon, 1994; simon & wallus, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2008). when identification to species was not possi- ble and genera represented multiple species, “spp.” was used as the specific epithet (e.g., lepomis spp.). additionally, if identification was most likely a specific species but was not completely certain, “cf” was applied (e.g., lepomis cf humilis) (bengston, 1988). fish were sepa- rated by developmental stage and lengths into larval and juvenile age classes (holland- bartels, littlejohn, & huston, 1990). age class lengths were established for all taxa based on published literature and per- sonal observations of developmental series (auer, 1982; becker, 1983; fuiman et al., 1983; robison & buchanan, 1984; wallus et al., 1990; etnier & starnes, 1993; kay et al., 1994; wallus et al., 1994; simon & wallus, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2008). fish older than age 0 were excluded from analyses. two nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nms) ordinations were used to examine structure of juvenile fish assemblages and larvae/ju- venile assemblages between habitats. fish abundances were summed for each site during each month. the study was designed to examine differences between habitats (across sites) and not microhabitat within a site; pooling data gave a more representative data set of fish as- semblages in a site and reduced high variability associated with trap/ net catch. further, ranked abundance data were used to prevent over- emphasis of ubiquitous species (e.g., bluegill) but maintain valuable     |  9 information from monthly spawning events and less common species unique to habitat types. most abundant species were given the highest rank, tied ranks were averaged, and species not collected at a site were given a rank of 1 to prevent tied averages of species not collected at a site from being overemphasised (mccune & grace, 2002; lubinski, jackson, & eggleton, 2008). taxa were removed from analyses if they occurred in fewer than two sites and represented less than 1% of total catch. statistical significance was a priori set at α = 0.10 for analyses because sample size was logistically constrained, and we anticipated high variance among replicates. the first ordination was constructed using light trap data only at the genus level, as that was the lowest possible taxonomic level to include both juvenile and larval fish. individuals not identified to at least genus were excluded from the analysis. this analysis used the most complete data set to examine assemblage structure across all habitats, particularly the main channel versus other floodplain sites. a second ordination was based on the averaged abundance ranks of juvenile fish collected in light traps and mini- fyke nets in floodplain habitats from may to july (mrc and april light trap data excluded). species abundances for each site were summed across all months and then ranked against all species collected with both gear types (lubinski et al., 2008). this analysis was conducted because it represented the finest level of taxonomic resolution and the most sensitive examina- tion of fish assemblages across floodplain sites. nms was conducted using pc- ord following general procedures outlined by mccune and grace (2002). a series of preliminary runs, starting with a 6- d solution stepping down to a 1- d solution using an instability criterion of 0.0005 of both real and randomised data sets, was used. two- hundred and fifty iterations and 50 runs of both real and ran- domised data were conducted using sørenson (bray–curtis) distances. after the preliminary analysis was conducted and the appropriate num- ber of dimensions was selected, nms was rerun using the final number of dimensions and the best starting configuration (mccune & grace, 2002). if a significant ordination was found, multiresponse permuta- tion procedure (mrpp) was used to test for differences in assemblage structure between a priori identified habitat types. individual taxon rela- tionships with statistically supported habitat groupings were described with indicator species analysis (isa) using the method of dufrêne and legendre (1997) as described by mccune and grace (2002), where values ranged from 0 to 100 (perfect indication based on both relative abundance and presence). a monte carlo test was used to assess signif- icance of ordinations. additionally, joint plots of significantly correlated environmental variables were overlaid on nms ordinations; length and angle of vectors indicated strength and direction of an environmental variable’s relationship to ordination scores (mccune & grace, 2002). 3 |  results 3.1 | hydrology, connectivity and physicochemical patterns during the study, there was one spring flood initiated by back- flooding of the arkansas river, beginning in mid- march and lasting 10  |     until mid- april (peaked at 9.2 m on march 24, 2012), that con- nected all floodplain sites with the main river channel (mrc) but for varying number of days. connectivity with the main channel was highest for lower tributaries (lt) (all 147 days), moderate for upper tributaries (mean = 40.3 days, range = 35–49 days) and low for oxbow lakes (mean = 15 days, range = 4–35 days). dendritic connectivity index further described variation among tributary sites and ranged from 100 for lower tributaries to 68.9 for upper west fork mill creek. among upper tributary sites, upper caney creek had a higher dci value due to the presence of more perme- able barriers (table 1). physicochemical variables differed across habitat types. in gen- eral, mrc was deeper and wider than most floodplain sites and had periodic flow between sampling dates. water depth decreased in all habitats from april to may and then remained relatively stable during june and july. average depth was greatest in the main channel (2.8 m ± 0.2 sd), but was <1.1 m in other habitats. main river channel (42.9 m ± 1.8 sd) and oxbow lakes (51.1 m ± 2.0 sd) were about two times wider than tributary sites. water temperatures were highest in ol habitats during all months (30.5°c ± 3.4 sd) and lowest in lt habitats (27.3°c ± 3.7 sd) in every month except april, when mrc temperatures were lowest (19.2°c ± 0.3 sd). average temperature was as high as 37.1°c ± 4.3 sd across oxbow lakes in july. total cover was low in all habitats (monthly mean ranks ranging from 0.9 to 2.0), primarily consisting of a narrow shoreline band of inundated herba- ceous vegetation in floodplain habitats and wood debris in the main channel. conductivity increased in all habitats across the study pe- riod and was highest in ut (131.8 μs ± 42.6 sd) and lowest in oxbow lakes (55.0 μs ± 14.4 sd). turbidity also increased across the study period, except in the mrc, which had the lowest turbidity on average (9.9 ntu ± 3.6 sd). turbidity was highest in ut (33.1 ntu ± 17.0 sd) and ol (29.8 ntu ± 19.3 sd) habitats. dissolved oxygen was vari- able in all habitats and months, but was highest in ut habitats in all months (7.5 mg/l ± 1.2 sd) and lowest in lt (5.0 mg/l ± 0.4 sd) and mrc (4.9 mg/l ± 1.5 sd) habitats from may to july. the ph of all habitats across all months ranged from 6 to 7. 3.2 | general spatial and temporal patterns of fish cumulatively, 12,925 larval and juvenile fish were collected rep- resenting 15 families. reproductive phenology and family rela- tive abundance patterns were typical for the region (figure 2). centrarchidae was the most abundant family across all habi- tats and months, representing 61.8% of total catch. additionally, centrarchidae was the most abundant family in all habitats across all months (mrc—83.3%; lt—64%; ut—51.7%; ol—51.3%). cyprinidae was the second most abundant taxon (15.1%) across all habitats; it was also the second most abundant taxon in lt (12.3%), ut (13.6%) and ol (32.5%) habitats. all other families combined comprised less than 23.1% of individuals captured and demon- strated varied patterns of abundance. shads (clupeidae) were cap- tured primarily in lt and mrc habitats, (72.9% and 20.9% of shads ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus figure 2 total relative abundance of seven most abundant families collected in light traps and mini- fyke nets in all months and pooled across 14 sites sampled in the fourche lafave river system from april to july 2012 caught respectively) but accounted for less than 2% of total fish col- lected in ut and ol habitats. silversides (atherinopsidae) were most abundant in oxbow lakes (38.8% of silversides collected); however, they were relatively common in all other habitats (mrc—15.8%; lt—25.8%; ut—19.6%). suckers (catostomidae) were caught al- most exclusively in ut and lt habitats, accounting for 79.2% and 20.1% of all suckers collected respectively. moreover, 96% of suck- ers were caught during the month of april. darters (percidae) were most abundant in ut and lt habitats (47.2% and 30.7% of all dart- ers collected) and were less common in oxbow lakes and the main river channel (16.2% and 5.9%). darters were collected in all months except july (<1% of percids collected). the total collection of young- of- year fishes was representative of the local adult fish assemblage and included 46 species/lowest possible identifiable unique taxa (see appendix s1 for a complete listing of taxa and abundances by habitat and gear type). the most abundant species collected, bluegill (lepomis macrochirus), only ac- counted for 36% of the total, exemplifying the diversity represented by the samples. bluegill was the most ubiquitous species and abun- dant in all habitats. pugnose minnow (opsopoeodus emiliae) was the next most abundant species (10% of total) followed by west- ern mosquitofish (gambusia affinis) and brook silverside (labidesthes sicculus) at 5% of total. abundances of gizzard shad (dorosoma cepedianum—4%), cypress minnow (hybognathus hayi—3%), war- mouth (lepomis gulosus—3%), orangespotted sunfish (lepomis hu- milis—3%) and crappies (pomoxis—3%) were noteworthy. in addition to cypress minnow and pugnose minnow, samples included collec- tions of numerous species that have little to no published data on ecology of early life stages in river–floodplains, for example pallid shiner (hybopsis amnis—27 individuals), weed shiner (notropis tex- anus—91), spotted sucker (minytrema melanops—122), mud darter (etheostoma asprigene—48), bluntnose darter (etheostoma chloro- soma—166), slough darter (etheostoma gracile—43) and harlequin darter (etheostoma histrio—9). ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus     |  11 figure 3 (a) axes 1 versus 2 nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nms) ordination of main river channel (hollow triangle), lower tributary (hollow circle), upper tributary (filled circle) and oxbow lake (hollow square) sites along the fourche lafave river based on abundances of larval and juvenile fish genera collected with light traps during 2012. significantly associated (r2 > .20) habitat vectors were plotted (see table 2). (b) genera scores from nms results for axes 1 and 2. axis area corresponds to grey box outlined in adjacent figure 3a. (c) nms ordination of axes 1 versus 3. (d) genera scores from nms results for axes 1 and 3. axis area corresponds to grey box outlined in adjacent figure 3c 3.3 | fish assemblage analyses 3.3.1 | larval/juvenile assemblages across main channel and floodplain habitats final nms solution for larval and juvenile fish genera caught in light traps was a three- dimensional solution (stress = 7.9; monte carlo p = .044). axes 1 and 2 represented the most variance based on coef- ficient of determination (r2) between ordination distance and original n- dimensional ordination (44% and 31% respectively); axis 3 repre- sented 15.9%. there was distinct separation of fish assemblages by habitat determined by multiresponse permutation procedure (mrpp) (p = .001) (figure 3a,c); bonferroni- adjusted pairwise comparisons yielded distinct fish assemblages in the main river channel compared 12  |     ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus table 2 results of associations of environmental variables measured in main channel and floodplain habitats in the fourche lafave river system with axis site scores from nonmetric multidimensional scaling of fish assemblages juvenile nms axis 1 environmental variable pearson r average temperature average width average depth total cover dissolved oxygen conductivity ph turbidity connectivity rank 0.080 0.386 −0.103 0.793 0.190 −0.390 −0.127 −0.474 −0.706 r2 0.006 0.149 0.011 0.630 0.036 0.152 0.016 0.225 0.499 axis 2 pearson r −0.305 −0.734 −0.506 0.334 −0.110 0.536 0.121 −0.107 0.285 r2 0.093 0.538 0.256 0.112 0.012 0.287 0.015 0.011 0.081 light trap nms axis 1 pearson r −0.031 −0.161 −0.658 0.496 0.323 0.189 0.207 0.125 −0.666 r2 0.001 0.026 0.433 0.246 0.104 0.036 0.043 0.016 0.443 bolded values represent statistically significant pearson’s r values at p < .1. axis 2 pearson r 0.029 0.480 0.507 0.176 0.024 −0.448 −0.359 −0.810 −0.019 r2 0.001 0.231 0.257 0.031 0.001 0.200 0.129 0.656 0.000 table 3 indicator species analysis (isa) scores corresponding with an nms ordination of 14 sites in the fourche lafave river system in multivariate space defined by abundances of juvenile and larval fish genera captured with light traps genus notemigonus ictiobus gambusia hybognathus elassoma opsopoeodus pomoxis pimephales minytrema fundulus cyprinella hybopsis pimephales/opsopoeodus notropis etheostoma micropterus dorosoma morone labidesthes lepomis isa 86.7 84.6 82.6 82.1 80.4 77.0 57.0 55.4 55.3 51.1 87.5 79.9 79.3 72.6 56.9 56.2 52.6 51.7 51.3 50.3 habitat fp fp fp fp fp fp fp fp fp fp mrc mrc mrc mrc mrc mrc mrc mrc mrc mrc mrpp determined main river channel sites (mrc) and floodplain sites (fp) had significantly distinct fish assemblages. to all floodplain habitats (lt, ut and ol) (p < .011), but floodplain habitats did not have fish assemblages significantly distinct from each other (p > .011). however, visual inspection of nms plots of axes 1 versus 2 and axes 1 versus 3 (figure 3a,c) suggested trends for dis- tinctiveness among floodplain fish assemblages, particularly oxbow lakes. interspersion of ucc with lower tributaries and urc and umc with oxbow lakes likely led to nonsignificant floodplain habitat group- ings. ordination of axes 2 versus 3 was not plotted because it revealed no unique patterns. indicator species analysis (isa) described asso- ciations between genera and habitat groups (main river channel and floodplain) determined from mrpp (table 3). cyprinella, pimephales/ opsopoeodus (most likely pimephales vigilax based on habitat asso- ciation), hybopsis and notropis were strongly associated (score > 70) with the main river channel. strong indicator genera for floodplain habitats included opsopoeodus, notemigonus, hybognathus, ictiobus and elassoma. increased depth and connectivity were positively asso- ciated with mrc sites, while most floodplain fish assemblages were associated with a gradient of increased turbidity and conductivity or an increase in total cover (table 2 and figure 3a). nms axis 3 further revealed assemblages of some lower tributary sites, and oxbow lakes were positively associated with temperature and average site width (table 2 and figure 3c). additional noteworthy patterns were evident in this ordina- tion. lower mill creek was more closely associated with main river sites than other lower tributaries, sharing the genera morone and micropterus with the deeper main channel (figure 3b). other trib- utary sites showed marginal separation from oxbow lakes, but not between upper and lower tributary habitats; this was partly due to upper caney creek grouping with lower tributaries (figure 3a). ucc had the highest overall dendritic connectivity value (table 1), making it the least fragmented of upper tributaries in the study. four genera were characteristic of lower tributaries (other than lower mill creek) and upper caney creek (dorosoma, pimephales, minytrema and pomoxis) (figure 3b). two additional genera were strongly associated with lower and upper caney creek (hybognathus and ictiobus) (figure 3b). these six genera were generally associ- ated with increased connectivity, as well as higher conductivity and ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus turbidity. visual observation of filamentous algae most likely ac- counted for high turbidity in ucc and lower caney creek (lcc); this was not the case for lower rankin creek (lrc) and lower lawson creek (llc) which had high inorganic turbidity. opsopoeodus was strongly associated with oxbow lakes which were wider and warmer (figure 3c,b). 3.3.2 | juvenile assemblages across floodplain habitats ordination of juvenile fish assemblages (combined light traps and mini- fyke nets) yielded a significant two- axis solution (p = .044) with moderate stress (11.52). the two axes represented 77% of variance in the data (axis 1—40% and axis 2—37%). juvenile fish assemblages var- ied across floodplain habitats (mrpp, p = .024). upper and lower trib- utary habitats had significantly different fish assemblages compared to oxbow lakes (p < 0.03), but tributary reaches were not significantly different from each other (p = 0.033). indicator species analysis, con- ducted using groups determined by mrpp (oxbow lakes versus tribu- tary reaches combined), identified only one species that was strongly associated with oxbow lakes (yellow bullhead, ameiurus natalis—82.6). five additional taxa showed moderate affinity for oxbow lakes: white crappie (pomoxis annularis), longear sunfish (lepomis megalotis), slough darter (etheostoma gracile), pugnose minnow and threadfin shad (dorosoma petenense) (table 4). oxbow lake assemblages were asso- ciated with increased width and decreased connectivity, conductiv- ity and total cover (figure 4a). in contrast, 13 taxa were strongly (isa score >70) associated with tributaries and three taxa were moderately associated (table 4). species with highest affinities for tributaries in- cluded cypress minnow (hybognathus hayi), emerald shiner (notropis atherinoides) and mud darter (etheostoma asprigene) (table 4). most tributary assemblages were associated with increased connectivity and turbidity and decreased width and total cover, but other associa- tions existed along gradients of depth and conductivity (table 2 and figure 4a). although not statistically distinct, lower tributaries and upper trib- utaries grouped separately in multivariate space with the exception of upper and lower caney creek (figure 4a). unlike other tributaries, lower and upper reaches of caney creek had similar fish assemblages based on proximity in the ordination. noteworthy is the fact that upper caney creek had the highest connectedness of all upper trib- utary sites. centroids of nine taxa (h. hayi, n. atherinoides, n. texanus, ictiobus spp., mi. melanops, el. zonatum, e. asprigene, e. gracile and e. histrio) were associated with caney creek (figure 4b). increased con- ductivity in caney creek (figure 4a) was most likely due to nutrient run- off from adjacent farms; these sites also had high amounts of fila- mentous algae. centroids of six species (d. cepedianum, d. petenense, h. amnis, pimephales vigilax, n. volucellus and mi. salmoides) grouped with lower tributaries (excluding lower caney creek) and were asso- ciated with increased connectivity, turbidity and depth (figure 4a,b). f. olivaceus, mi. punctulatus, lepisosteus spp. and ga. affinis were as- sociated with upper rankin and upper mill creek, two tributary sites having high total cover. (figure 4a,b).     |  13 4 |  discussion young- of- year fish assemblages in the flr were strongly associated with differences in degree of connectivity of habitats with the main river channel. tributaries, especially lower reaches, were highly con- nected habitats and supported a high diversity of young fishes. main channel water levels were approximately 1 m lower during this study compared to the 20- year average and probably contributed to low reproductive success of some floodplain- dependent species (e.g., atractosteus/lepisosteus and ictiobus spp.) (martin & paller, 2008), known to maintain sizable populations in the flr channel. these fishes are known to utilise floodplain tributaries in the flr (cjn and sra; personal observation) in other years; thus, our estimated fish use of tributaries is probably conservative. the value of tributaries as nursery habitat was relatively high compared to that of oxbow lakes based on assemblage differences and species’ affinities. in addition, we found noteworthy use of the main channel as nursery habitat. this data set provides nursery habitat information for many regional spe- cies, but also draws attention to the value of a relatively overlooked river habitat and, in some instances, differences in fish–habitat rela- tions in medium- sized rivers versus larger rivers. young fishes collected at a given floodplain site in the flr were likely progeny of resident adults or migrant adults that selected specific microhabitat requirements for spawning and accessed the site during connection with the main channel. one would predict that spawning success of fishes during this study, particularly of species migrating from the main channel and responding to flooding, was influenced by the timing, duration and magnitude of flooding in the flr (junk et al., 1989 and górski et al., 2010). a single flood event of moderate du- ration and magnitude occurred during end of march 2012, and then, water levels remained low and stable, likely benefitting early- season spawners and fishes that prefer stable water levels for spawning and recruitment in other months. floodplain- dependent fish common in the flr that spawn in response to flooding during late spring early summer (e.g., atractosteus spatula, ictiobus spp., carpiodes spp. and cyprinus carpio) experienced little to no reproductive success during this study, so their habitat usage was not well quantified. despite this limitation, the current study elucidated differences in nursery habitat function of habitats within a medium- sized river–floodplain ecosys- tem with a relatively robust data set (two gear types; 46 taxa), encom- passing taxa and habitats common to lowland rivers throughout the southern united states. not surprisingly, larval fish assemblages were distinct between main river channel and floodplain habitats (tributaries and oxbow lakes) in analyses when all were compared together. many studies in river systems of north america, both similar in size and larger than the flr, have found differences in main channel and floodplain fish assemblages, both adult and young- of- year (e.g., turner et al., 1994; lubinski et al., 2008). nannini, goodrich, dettmers, soluk, and wahl (2012) found different larval and juvenile fishes in the main channel of the illinois river and associated backwater lakes. additionally, sheaffer and nickum (1986) found differences in larval and juvenile fishes 14  |     table 4 juvenile species collected in mini- fyke nets and their species codes plotted on nms plot (figure 4b) and corresponding indicator species analysis (isa) scores with significantly different habitat groupings from multiresponse permutation procedure (oxbow lake- ol and lower and upper tributaries- trib) species species code isa value habitat hybognathus hayi notropis atherinoides etheostoma asprigene elassoma zonatum lepomis cyanellus minytrema melanops notropis volucellus etheostoma histrio micropterus punctulatus hybopsis amnis ictiobus spp. notropis texanus aphredoderus sayanus pimephales vigilax micropterus salmoides lepomis gulosus pomoxis nigromaculatus gambusia affinis ameiurus natalis pomoxis annularis lepomis megalotis etheostoma gracile opsopoeodus emiliae dorosoma petenense lepisosteus spp. labidesthes sicculus lepomis humilis fundulus olivaceus dorosoma cepedianum lepomis macrochirus etheostoma chlorosoma hy.ha no.at et.as el.zo le.ca mi.me no.vo et.hi mi.pu hy.am ict.sp no.te ap.sa pi.vi mi.sa le.gu po.ni ga.af am.na po.an le.me et.gr op.em do.pe lepis.sp la.si le.hu fu.ol do.ce le.ma et.ch 93.8 92.2 90.2 88.3 88.1 87.7 84.3 83.7 83.5 82.7 82.3 74.1 73.6 66.2 64.4 59.7 56.2 52.9 82.6 67.7 66 60.6 60.2 59 56.6 52.8 52.5 51.2 50.9 50.2 50.2 trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib trib ol ol ol ol ol ol ol ol ol ol ol ol ol between backwater habitats (tributaries and sloughs) and main chan- nel of the upper mississippi river. in both previous studies, progeny of more rheophilic taxa (catostomidae, moronidae and sciaenidae) were associated with main river channel habitats, and typically, nonrheoph- ilic taxa (centrarchidae and clupeidae) were more abundant in back- water habitats. despite a paucity of the aforementioned rheophilic taxa in this study, it is notable that distinct young- of- year assemblages were still found in the main river channel and floodplain habitats of the flr. assemblage differences between main channel and floodplain habitats of the flr were driven by occurrence patterns of species unique to floodplain or main channel habitats and varied abundance ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus patterns of centrarchids, the most abundant family. only two spe- cies were exclusively collected in the main river channel (centrarchus macropterus and cyprinella venusta), compared to 19 species that were caught exclusively in one or more floodplain habitats (appendix s1). centrarchids construct nests, often in shallow water, and do not usually use main channels as spawning and nursery habitat in larger systems. however, larvae and juveniles were distributed throughout all habitat types in the current study. some centrarchids (i.e., l. hu- milis, l. gulosus and l. cyanellus) showed a typical pattern of affinity for floodplain habitats. lepomis macrochirus, however, was the most abundant species in all habitats sampled during the study. considered a macrohabitat generalist (galat & zueimüller, 2001), it is still often found in lower numbers in the main river channel compared to flood- plain habitats (winemiller et al., 2000; zeug et al., 2005). stable, low- flow conditions during the latter part of the study may have provided conditions suitable for nest construction and/or growth and survival of young life stages in the main channel for some centrarchids such as bluegill (brown & coon, 1994). additionally, micropterus spp. were more common in main river channel and lower tributary habitats and rarely collected in upper tributaries and oxbow lakes. main channels of medium- sized rivers may be more supportive of reproduction of some fishes (e.g., centrarchids) more typically associated with floodplains in larger river systems, especially during stable, low- flow years. when evaluated independently from the main river channel, juve- nile floodplain fish assemblages varied between habitats, particularly tributaries (lower and upper) relative to oxbow lakes. tributaries and oxbow lakes shared many juvenile fish species in terms of occurrence (17); however, most shared species had higher abundances in tributary habitats. the overall number of species collected in oxbow lakes was lower, and tributaries had more unique species than oxbow lakes (9 versus 0 respectively). several factors could have led to lower larval and juvenile richness and abundance in oxbow lakes, including reduced resident fish populations due to extirpation events “ratcheting down” overall richness (sensu perkins, gido, costigan, daniels, & johnson, 2014), lack of recolonisation due to infrequent or short- duration con- nections (miranda, 2005), lack of seasonal migrants from reduced con- nectivity (miyazono et al., 2010) and/or harsher conditions leading to lower growth and survival rates of young fishes (shoup & wahl, 2009). dynamics of lower abundances of young- of- year fishes in oxbow lakes depends on lake characteristics (e.g., connectivity, depth, width, dis- solved oxygen concentration and primary production) and annual vari- ations in hydrologic conditions (zueg & winemiller, 2008; shoup & wahl, 2009). oxbow lakes in the flr floodplain were generally perched and shallow and had low connectivity with the main channel, character- istics that probably reduced their function as nursery habitat relative to tributaries. aforementioned effects on fishes have been observed in similar oxbow lakes in other southern us rivers. both winemiller et al. (2000) and goetz et al. (2015) observed that shallow oxbow lakes (<1.5 m) of the brazos river (texas, usa) and yazoo river (mississippi, usa) respectively had lower fish abundance than deeper lakes and supported fish assemblages of more tolerant small- bodied species, similar to taxa abundant in oxbow lakes of the flr (i.e., o. ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus     |  15 figure 4 (a) nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nms) ordination of juvenile fish collected with mini- fyke nets and light traps from lower tributary (hollow circle), upper tributary (filled circle) and oxbow lake (hollow square) habitats along the fourche lafave river in 2012. strongly correlated (r2 > .20) habitat vectors are plotted in species space. (b) species scores from nms ordination; axes correspond to inlayed grey box in figure 4a emiliae, la. sicculus, l. humilis and g. affinis). nursery habitat function of flr oxbow lakes is probably variable through time due to their shal- low depth and connectivity limitations. in support, shoup and wahl (2009) found that young- of- year fish abundance in oxbow lakes of the kaskaskia river (illinois, usa) was strongly related to mean depth and days connected to the main river channel which varied highly between years. the 3- year period prior to the current study was character- ised by no summer flooding and lowest channel flow occurred during summer when temperature and drying are highest. during 2011 (year preceding sampling), harsh conditions probably negatively impacted oxbow lake fish assemblages extensively as no flooding occurred from may to december. shallow water levels, higher temperatures and short duration of connections to the main river channel during and preceding the study period may have increased extinction, reduced immigration and reduced larval and juvenile fish survival in flr oxbow lakes. we hypothesise that nursery habitat function of flr oxbow lakes is increased during and following years of summer floods that provide connections with the main channel, increasing immigration and reducing harshness of abiotic conditions. a well- supported paradigm is that low- flow habitats adjacent to the main channel and on the floodplain are important for fish re- cruitment (welcomme, 1979). more so than oxbow lakes, tributaries were valuable fish nursery areas in the flr as both total abundance and total richness of larval and juvenile fishes collected were high- est in these habitats (appendix s1). tributaries were of low gradient, usually had no measurable flow and were highly connected to the main channel, particularly lower reaches. in a river system where backwater habitat was absent and oxbow lakes were shallow and disconnected, tributaries functioned as nursery habitat for a diver- sity of fishes. lower tributaries were unique, as of the 46 species identified, only six were not collected in lower tributary habitats. adventitious tributaries in other temperate systems have been described as eco- tones between lowland river and upland streams whereby increased diversity was due to a mixing of these two fish faunas (schaefer & kerfoot, 2004; yi and gelwick, 2005). in contrast, flr tributaries re- sided largely in the floodplain and provided nursery habitat for both channel (e.g., n. atherinoides, n. volucellus, hy. amnis and m. melanops) and resident floodplain fishes (versus upland fishes) (e.g., h. hayi, el. zonatum, a. sayanus, l. gulosus and g. affinis). many resident floodplain fishes probably spawned throughout tributaries, but young of channel fishes, particularly those found in lower tributaries, could have been the result of both channel fishes moving into tributaries to spawn and channel- spawned young mov- ing into lower tributaries actively or passively, similar to movements between channels and connected backwaters in other rivers (csoboth & garvey, 2008). n. volucellus, e. histrio, i. furcatus and pylodictis oli- varis occurred either exclusively in lower tributary habitats or mostly in lower tributaries but in very low numbers in main channel habi- tats. additionally, p. vigilax, hy. amnis and p. caprodes occurred in equal abundance in both habitats. as adults, these seven fishes are usually more abundant in or near flow or deeper, structured habitats typical 16  |     of main channel areas and lower tributaries in the flr (becker, 1983; robison & buchanan, 1984; kwak, 1991) (personal observations). high abundances of young fishes of this group within lower tribu- taries suggested young drift or swim into lower tributary habitat or adults spawn in lower tributaries. similar to other systems, movement of young fish from tributaries to channels is probably an important phenomenon in the flr but was not measured (sheaffer & nickum, 1986; martin & paller, 2008). dynamics of permanently connected confluences within a river–floodplain system and their dual function of providing refugia and nursery habitat for both main channel and floodplain fishes and as a source of fish recruitment to the main river channel and floodplain habitats are complex and require further study. movement and distribution of fish within a stream is often influ- enced by the presence, type and number of barriers located within the stream network (cote et al., 2009; bourne, kehler, wiersma, & cote, 2011; perkins & gido, 2012; mahulum, kehler, cote, wiersma, & stanfield, 2014). this phenomenon is more well known in upland streams; however, we found evidence barriers may have affected young fish assemblages in upper reaches of floodplain tributaries. rankin and west fork mill creeks had lower dci scores and upper and lower reaches in these tributaries tended to have dissimilar young fish assemblages respectively. in contrast, caney creek had relatively higher dci scores and upper and lower reaches tended to have highly similar young fish assemblages. upper caney creek pro- vided nursery habitat for a number of species that probably resulted from successful upstream migration of adults from the main channel into the upper reach to spawn (e.g., ictiobus spp., n. atherinoides, mi. melanops and e. histrio), but these species were notably absent/ reduced in upper reaches of rankin and west fork mill creeks. concrete slab- style road crossings and culverts found on rankin and west fork mill creeks are known to be barriers to upstream fish movement in upland arkansas streams (warren & pardew, 1998). two slightly elevated gravel road crossings were the only barriers present on caney creek, allowing greater connectivity. barrier im- pacts were likely more pronounced during this study as local, within catchment spates and river backflooding, events that would raise water levels and potentially overtop barriers, were both infrequent during the year of sampling. during years of increased river back- flooding, we predict fish assemblages in upper reaches of rankin and west fork mill creeks would have higher representation of channel fishes and greater similarity between upper and lower reaches (sensu perkins and gido 2012) due to greater exchange of fishes in both the upstream and downstream direction. lower and upper caney creek young fish assemblages were sim- ilar but unique relative to other tributary habitats and oxbow lakes based on ordinations. in addition to higher barrier permeability, caney creek had other characteristics that likely led to unique fish assem- blages in this tributary. higher organic turbidity and conductivity suggest productivity may have been higher in caney creek. caney creek maintained connections with a small, shallow vegetated wet- land and an adjacent floodplain lake. this connectivity with other hab- itats within the floodplain, in addition to higher connectivity with the main river channel, likely enhanced the nursery habitat function of ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus caney creek. in support, miyazono et al. (2010) found connectivity of floodplain lakes of the yazoo river, usa, based on horizontal dis- tance to river, number of inlets and outlets present, and total area of neighbouring water bodies was positively correlated with presence of fish with periodic life history strategies (winemiller & rose, 1992). young of several periodic strategists (e.g., mi. melanops and ictiobus spp.) and fishes with affinities for wetlands (e.g., el. zonatum and a. sayanus) were collected almost exclusively in caney creek. spawning and rearing of a diversity of fishes probably benefitted from the high movement and dispersal capabilities and increased habitat heteroge- neity (e.g., shallow open water to inundated vegetation). young- of- year assemblage patterns in caney creek highlight the importance of maintaining both longitudinal and lateral connections within flood- plain tributaries to maximise available spawning and nursery habitat within the floodplain mosaic. this study was performed in a medium- sized, lowland river system characteristic of many floodplain rivers in the south- eastern united states and other temperate rivers that have both floodplain tributaries and oxbow lakes or floodplain lakes. to our knowledge, this was the first to directly compare spawning and nursery function of the main channel, low- order tributaries and oxbow lakes. similar to findings by shoup and wahl (2009), the main river channel was found to be pro- ductive spawning and nursery habitat for many fishes, but maintained a distinct fish assemblage from the floodplain. tributary habitat (espe- cially lower tributaries) had higher cumulative species richness than oxbow lake habitats and had higher abundance of most shared taxa. oxbow lakes along the fourche lafave river were perched, shallow and in later stages of succession from primarily aquatic to primarily terrestrial environs. these characteristics, along with low water levels associated with an extreme drought year (climate prediction center, noaa, 2012), resulted in infrequent, short- duration reconnections to the main channel, reducing their value as spawning and rearing hab- itat to a smaller subset of floodplain fishes. higher usage of tributar- ies as spawning and nursery habitat by riverine species and a higher diversity of floodplain fishes in this study highlights their value in the maintenance of fish populations in river systems where oxbow lakes are degraded or are no longer being formed (sensu miranda, 2005). this is not meant to devalue oxbow lakes, because it is well estab- lished in the literature that they can be a key component facilitating recruitment of fishes residing in river–floodplain systems, and every effort should be made to restore/maintain connection to the main river channel. our findings illustrate that tributaries, especially low- gradient adventitious streams that reside mostly in the floodplain, have been an overlooked feature of the river–floodplain model. not all tributaries are utilised equally as fish spawning and nursery habi- tats, and they can be impacted by barriers similar to upland streams. additional research is necessary to understand factors driving differ- ences among and within tributaries in the river–floodplain system. acknowledgements partial funding was provided by the university of central arkansas. we thank the many people who helped with fieldwork and laboratory ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus work: ben thesing, casey cox, chelsey sherwood, dj sweet, garrett grimes, geoff spooner, jason christian, jessie jean green, luke pearson and richard walker. we would like to thank gabriel knight of the us army corps of engineers, little rock, ar, for helping with floodplain modelling and dr. jack killgore of the us army corps of engineers engineer research and development center, vicksburg, ms, for loaning light traps used during the project. we would like to thank land owners for granting us permission to access sites on private land. we thank dr. ginny adams, dr. katherine larson and lindsey lewis for their thoughtful help throughout the project. lastly, we thank the two anonymous reviewers for their comments that im- proved the overall quality of this manuscript. references auer, n. a. (1982). identification of larval and juvenile fishes of the great lakes basin with emphasis on the lake michigan drainage. great lakes fishery commission, special publication 82–3, ann arbor, mi. baker, j. a., killgore, k. j., & kasul, r. l. (1991). aquatic habitats and fish communities in the lower mississippi river. reviews in aquatic sciences, 3, 313–356. bayley, p. b. (1995). understanding large river–floodplain ecosystems. bioscience, 45, 153–157. becker, g. c. (1983). fishes of wisconsin. madison, wi: the university of wisconsin press. bengston, p. (1988). open nomenclature. palaeontology, 31, 223–227. bourne, c. m., kehler, d. g., wiersma, y. f., & cote, c. (2011). barriers to fish passage and barriers to fish passage assessments: the impacts of assessment methods and assumptions on barrier identification and quantification of watershed connectivity. aquatic ecology, 45, 389–403. brown, d. j., & coon, t. g. (1994). abundance and assemblage structure of fish larvae in the lower missouri river and its tributaries. transactions of the american fisheries society, 123, 718–732. chao, a., gotelli, n. j., hsieh, t. c., sander, e. l., ma, k. h., colwell, r. k., & ellison, a. m. (2014). rarefaction and extrapolation with hill numbers: a framework for sampling and estimation in species diversity studies. ecological monographs, 84, 45–67. clark, s. a., jackson, j. r., & lochmann, s. e. (2007). a comparison of shoreline seines with fyke nets for sampling littoral fish communities in floodplain lakes. north american journal of fisheries management, 27, 676–680. climate prediction center, noaa. (2012) drought severity index by divi- sion. http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov. copp, g. h., & peňáz, m. (1988). ecology of fish spawning and nursery zones in the flood- plain, using a new sampling approach. hydrobiologia, 169, 209–224. cote, d., kehler, d. g., bourne, c., & wiersma, y. f. (2009). a new measure of longitudinal connectivity for stream networks. landscape ecology, 24, 101–113. csoboth, l. a., & garvey, j. e. (2008). lateral exchange of larval fish be- tween a restored backwater and a large river in east- central usa. transactions of the american fisheries society, 137, 33–44. dufrêne, m., & legendre, p. (1997). species assemblages and indicator species: the need for a flexible asymmetrical approach. ecological monographs, 67, 345–366. etnier, d. a., & starnes, w. c. (1993). the fishes of tennessee. knoxville, tn: the university of tennessee press. fuiman, l. a., conner, j. v., lathrop, b. f., buynak, g. l., snyder, d. e., & loos, j. l. (1983). state of the art identification for cyprinid fish lar- vae from eastern north america. transactions of the american fisheries society, 112, 319–332.     |  17 galat, d. l., & zueimüller, i. (2001). conserving large- river fishes: is the highway analogy an appropriate paradigm? journal of the north american benthological society, 20, 266–279. goetz, d., miranda, l. e., kröger, r., & andrews, c. (2015). the role of depth in regulating water quality and fish assemblages in oxbow lakes. environmental biology of fishes, 98, 951–959. gogola, t. a., sanches, p. v., gubiani, é. a., & da silva, p. r. l. (2013). spatial and temporal variations in fish larvae assemblages of ilha grande national park, brazil. ecology of freshwater fish, 22, 95–105. górski, k., winter, h. v., de leeum, j. j., minin, a. e., & nagelkerke, a. j. (2010). fish spawning in a large temperate floodplain: the role of flooding and temperature. freshwater biology, 55, 1509–1519. holland, l. e. (1986). distribution of early life history stages of fishes in se- lected pools of the upper mississippi river. hydrobiologia, 136, 121–130. holland-bartels, l. e., littlejohn, s. k., & huston, m. l. (1990). a guide to larval fishes of the upper mississippi river. lacrosse, wi: u.s. fish and wildlife service. hsieh, t. c., ma, k. h., & chao, a. (2015). an r package for interpolation and extrapolation of species diversity (hill numbers). http://chao.stat. nthu.edu.tw/blog/software-download/ inebnit, t.e. iii (2009). aspects of the reproductive and juvenile ecology of alligator gar in the fourche lafave river, arkansas. unpublished. master’s thesis. university of central arkansas. http://www.sdafs.org/ alligar/docs/tommy% 20inebnit%20master%20thesis.pdf. janáč, m., ondračková, j., jurajda, p., valová, z., & reichard, m. (2010). flood duration determines the reproduction success of fish in artificial oxbows in a floodplain of a potamal river. ecology of freshwater fish, 19, 644–655. junk, w. j., bayley, p. b., & sparks, r. e. (1989). the flood pulse concept in river–floodplain systems. canadian journal fisheries and aquatic sciences, 106, 110–127. kay, l. k., wallus, r., & yeager, b. l. (1994). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: vol. 2. catostomidae. chattanooga, tn: tennessee valley authority. killgore, k. j., & baker, j. a. (1996). patterns of larval fish abundance in a bottomland hardwood wetland. the society of wetlands scientists, 16, 288–295. kluender, e. r., adams, r., & lewis, l. (2016). seasonal habitat use of alli- gator gar in a river–floodplain ecosystem at multiple spatial scales. ecology of freshwater fish. doi:10.1111/eff.12270 kwak, t. j. (1991). ecological characteristics of a northern population of pallid shiner. transactions of the american fisheries society, 120, 106–115. lubinski, b. j., jackson, j. r., & eggleton, m. a. (2008). relationships be- tween floodplain lake fish communities and environmental variables in a large- river–floodplain ecosystem. transactions of the american fisheries society, 137, 895–908. mahulum, s., kehler, d., cote, d., wiersma, y. f., & stanfield, l. (2014). assessing the biological relevance of aquatic connectivity to stream fish communities. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 71, 1852–1863. martin, f., & paller, m. h. (2008). ichthyoplankton transport in relation to floodplain width and inundation and tributary creek discharge in the lower savannah river of georgia and south carolina. hydrobiologia, 598, 139–148. mccune, b., & grace, j. b. (2002). analysis of ecological communities. gleneden beach, or: mjm software designs. mérigoux, s., & ponton, d. (1999). spatio- temporal distributions of young fish in tributaries of natural and flow- regulated sections of a neotropi- cal river in french guiana. freshwater biology, 42, 177–198. miranda, l. e. (2005). fish assemblages in oxbow lakes relative to connec- tivity with the mississippi river. transactions of the american fisheries society, 134, 1480–1489. miyazono, s., aycock, j. n., miranda, l. e., & tietjen, t.e. (2010). assemblage patterns of fish functional groups relative to habitat connectivity con- ditions in floodplain lakes. ecology of freshwater fish, 19, 578–585. 18  |     nannini, m. a., goodrich, j., dettmers, j. m., soluk, d. a., & wahl, d. h. (2012). larval and early juvenile fish dynamics in main channel and backwater lake habitats of the illinois river ecosystem. ecology of freshwater fish, 21, 499–509. nilsson, c., reidy, c. a., dynesius, m., & revenga, c. (2005). fragmentation and flow regulation of the world’s large river systems. science, 308, 405–408. penczak, t., galicka, w., głowacki, ł., koszalińkski, h., kruk, a., zięba, g., … marszał, l. (2004). fish assemblage changes relative to environmen- tal factors and time in the warta river, poland, and its oxbow lakes. journal of fish biology, 64, 483–501. perkins, j. s., & gido, k. b. (2012). fragmentation alters stream fish commu- nity structure in dendritic ecological networks. ecological applications, 22, 2176–2187. perkins, j. s., gido, k. b., costigan, k. h., daniels, m. d., & johnson, e. r. (2014). fragmentation and drying rachet down great plains stream fish diversity. aquatic conservation: marine and freshwater ecosystems, 5, 639–655. doi:10.1002/aqc.2501 peterson, j. t., & paukert, c. p. (2009). converting nonstandardized fish sampling data to standardized data. in s. a. bonar, w. a. hubert, & d. w. willis (eds.), standard methods for sampling north american freshwater fishes (pp. 195–215). bethesda, md: american fisheries society. ribeiro, f., crain, p. k., & moyle, p. b. (2004). variation in condition factor and growth in young- of- year fishes in floodplain and riverine habitats of the cosumnes river, california. hydrobiologia, 527, 77–84. robison, h. w., & buchanan, t. m. (1984). fishes of arkansas. fayetville, ar: the university of arkansas press. schaefer, j. f., & kerfoot, j. r. (2004). fish dynamics in an adventitious stream: a landscape perspective. american midland naturalist, 151, 134–145. sheaffer, w. a., & nickum, j. b. (1986). backwater areas as nursery habitats for fishes in pool 13 of the upper mississippi river. hydrobiologia, 136, 131–140. scheidegger, k. j., & bain, m. b. (1995). larval fish distribution and  microhabitat use in free- flowing and regulated rivers. copeia, 1, 125–135. shoup, d. e., & wahl, d. h. (2009). fish diversity and abundance in relation to interannual and lake- specific variation in abiotic characteristics of floodplain lakes of the lower kaskaskia river, illinois. transactions of the american fisheries society, 138, 1076–1092. simon, t. p., & wallus, r. (2003). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: ictaluridae- catfish and madtoms, vol. 3. new york, ny: crc press. simon, t. p., & wallus, r. (2005). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: percidae—perch, pikeperch, and darters, vol. 4. new york, ny: crc press. simon, t. p., & wallus, r. (2006). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: aphredoderidae through sciaenidae., moronidae, and sciaenidae, volume 5. new york, ny: crc press. simon, t. p., & wallus, r. (2008). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: elassomatidae and centrarchidae, vol. 6. new york, ny: crc press. tockner, k., & stanford, j.a. (2002). review of: riverine flood plains: present state and future trends. biological sciences faculty publications. paper 166. http://scholarworks.umt.edu/biosci_pups/166 ﻿naus n﻿nd nndnaus turner, t. f., trexler, j. c., miller, g. l., & toyer, k. e. (1994). temporal and spatial dynamics of larval and juvenile fish abundance in a temperate floodplain river. copeia, 1994, 174–183. u.s. geological survey. (2014). national water information system data avail- able on the world wide web (usgs water data for the nation). http:// waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/annual?referred_ module=sw&amp;site_ no =07263012&amp;por_07263012_12=279363,00060,12,2003,20 14&amp;year_type=w&amp;format=html_table&amp;date_format =yyyy-mmdd&amp;rdb_compression= &amp; submitted_form=para meter_selection_list#. wallus, r., kay, l. a., & simon, t. p. (1994). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: catostomidae, vol. 2. new york, ny: crc press. wallus, r., simon, t. p., & yeager, b. l. (1990). reproductive biology and early life history of fishes in the ohio river drainage: acipenseridae through esocidae, vol. 1. new york, ny: crc press. warren, m. l. jr, & pardew, m. g. (1998). road crossings as barriers to small- stream fish movement. transactions of the american fisheries society, 127, 637–644. welcomme, r. l. (1979). fisheries ecology of floodplain rivers. new york, ny: longman. winemiller, k. o., & rose, k. a. (1992). patterns of life- history diversifica- tion in north american fishes: implications for population regulation. canadian journal of aquatic sciences, 49, 2196–2218. winemiller, k. o., tarim, s., shormann, d., & cotner, j. b. (2000). fish assemblage structure in relation to environmental variation among brazos river oxbow lakes. transactions of the american fisheries society, 129, 451–468. yi, r. y., & gelwick, f. p. (2005). the relationship of environmental factors to spatial and temporal variation of fish assemblages in a floodplain river in texas, usa. ecology of freshwater fish, 14, 319–330. zeug, s. c., winemiller, k. o., & tarim, s. (2005). response of brazos river oxbow fish assemblages to patterns of hydrologic connectivity and en- vironmental variability. transactions of the american fisheries society, 134, 1389–1399. zueg, s. c., & winemiller, k. o. (2008). relationships between hydrology, spatial, heterogeneity, and fish recruitment dynamics in a temperate floodplain river. river research and applications, 24, 90–102. supporting information additional supporting information may be found online in the support- ing information tab for this article. how to cite this article: naus cj, reid adams s. fish nursery habitat function of the main channel, floodplain tributaries and oxbow lakes of a medium- sized river. ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:4–18. https://doi. org/10.1111/eff.12319  