ecology of freshwater fish 2014: 23: 483–484 ó 2014 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish obituary in memoriam robert j. wootton (1942–2014) carl smith1, david c. heins2 1school of biology, university of st andrews, st andrews, fife ky16 8lb, united kingdom 2department of ecology & evolutionary biology, tulane university, new orleans, la 70118 usa accepted for publication august 9, 2014 a culture is defined in part by its science. in the pro- cess of scientific enquiry, icons remarkable for their contributions, sometimes unique, emerge from the community. robert (‘bob’) wootton was just such an individual. as a highly accomplished fish ecologist and evolutionary biologist, bob was an authority on the three-spined stickleback, a species he successfully championed as a model species for research. in pro- moting the stickleback as a biological model, bob’s work reached beyond his own investigations in that he served as a synthesiser of knowledge and a facilitator of the scientific process. in this way, his efforts con- tributed to the development of a ‘supermodel’ in evo- lutionary biology (heins 2012) – a unique biological model whereby ‘disparate branches of biology can be synthesised to provide fresh perspectives on funda- mental evolutionary phenomena’ (gibson 2005). bob’s knowledge of three-spined stickleback biol- ogy was unsurpassed. during his working life, he owned a copy, and had read, every paper published on the species. he was convinced of the utility of this ani- mal for tackling key evolutionary and ecological ques- tions. and he was subsequently proven right. that the three-spined stickleback arose as the premier verte- brate ‘supermodel’ in evolutionary biology is partly attributable to bob’s contributions of original research on the species – and especially to his outstanding syn- thesis of the natural history of the stickleback fishes, the biology of the sticklebacks, published in 1976, and later a functional biology of sticklebacks in 1984. these treaties have received over 1000 cita- tions. it is regrettable that one of the unfinished tasks he had set himself in retirement was producing an updated version of the biology of the sticklebacks. there are few biologists with the breadth and depth of knowledge to tackle a work of this magnitude. although bob’s legacy will be focused on stickle- backs, his interests and major accomplishments extend broadly to fish ecology. his most cited work is ecol- ogy of teleost fishes, the standard text on the subject since its first publication in 1990. arguably bob’s most significant contribution to the field of fish biol- ogy is through the series of prominent books he wrote and edited that have been widely used in teaching and research. bob also published over 100 research papers and reviews and is one of the most highly cited fish biologists. bob’s philosophy was that to fully appreci- ate fish ecology, it is necessary to understand growth, as it is body size that plays a pivotal role in fundamen- tal ecological processes, such as reproduction, preda- tion and mortality. growth, bob thought, is the key to understanding fish life history evolution. understand- ing growth required and understanding of feeding, bob, along with several of his postgraduate students, published a series of influential papers on growth, body size and bioenergetics in fish. sadly, while bob was highly valued by his colleagues at aberystwyth, his research received little external support; it was a source of great frustration for him to see modish but mediocre research obtain generous financial assis- tance. bob’s contribution to research was, however, recognised when he was elected as a fellow of the linnean society and awarded the le cren medal by the fisheries society of the british isles. bob performed long-term editorial roles for both the journal of fish biology and ecology of freshwa- ter fish. he was a proficient and conscientious editor and provided admirable service to both journals for many years. he was extremely generous with his time and skilfully and selflessly read and commented on manuscripts for colleagues and students through- out his career. in 2012, the editors of ecology of correspondence: david c. heins, department of ecology & evolutionary biology, tulane university, new orleans, la 70118, usa e-mail: heins@tulane.edu doi: 10.1111/eff.12178 483 smith & heins freshwater fish recognised his contribution by nam- ing him editorial board member emeritus. and the editors of ecology of freshwater fish have now hon- oured him as editorial board member eternal. bob’s other great legacy is the cohorts of under- graduate and postgraduate students he taught. bob had a deep commitment to teaching and was an out- standingly gifted lecturer. he was instrumental in establishing innovative degree courses at aber- ystwyth and undertook a staggering amount of this teaching himself. remarkably, bob taught his fish ecology course entirely without props or audio–visual aids – no powerpoint slides, overheads, handouts, not even a chalkboard. armed with nothing more than his own profound understanding of the subject, he simply stood (and more often sat) at the front of the lecture theatre and explained the principles of the subject he understood so well. his lectures were enthralling and greatly appreciated by his students. importance bob’s influence extended well outside the uk. his stickleback work had particular for researchers in canada and the usa, where research on these fishes has been best developed, and he held an adjunct professorship at mcgill university in can- ada. bob also instituted and maintained links with chinese scientists, long before it became customary to do so. one of bob’s most accomplished postgradu- ate students was yibo cui, who established a major research centre on fish ecology and biotechnology at the institute of hydrobiology in wuhan. bob had a great fondness for china; he visited regularly, spoke mandarin and received a series of chinese students and visitors to his laboratory, many of whom now hold influential positions in chinese science. born and raised in birmingham, uk, bob took his first degree in natural sciences at christ’s college, cambridge (the same cambridge college as charles darwin), followed by a phd at the university of brit- ish columbia in vancouver. bob’s postgraduate research concerned methods for quantifying male behaviour in the three-spined stickleback, the species with which he was to become most associated. after returning to the uk, bob accepted a postdoctoral fel- lowship in the department of psychology at the uni- versity of durham, working on the neurobiology of cognition in pigeons. despite this change in study system, bob confessed that while at durham, he used to take his sandwiches down to the river wear at lunchtime where he could watch sticklebacks nesting in a backwater. indeed, bob subsequently published a paper on threespine stickleback nest-raiding behav- iour based on these lunchtime observations. he cut short his postdoctoral research to take a lectureship in the department of zoology at the university college of wales, aberystwyth. this department went through numerous reorganisations and name changes 484 over his career, but it was essentially the same insti- tution he retired from as reader 40 years later. three events in his life were defining for bob. the first was the birth of his twins, sean and siob- han. bob’s family had overwhelming importance for him. he was devoted to maureen, his wife, and their twins. latterly, he was thrilled to become a grandfather to alfie and ella. the second defining event was a successful ascent of mont blanc, the highest peak in the alps. mountaineering was a major passion of his, and he was an accomplished climber and climbed a number of the most challeng- ing alpine peaks. the third life-defining moment for bob was receipt of the published version of his first book, the biology of the sticklebacks. he had written the book to occupy the long hours when his newly born twins took turns in keeping him awake at night, but it was clearly a work of which he was justifiably extremely proud. bob was quiet, self-effacing and courteous. yet in a calm and consistent way, he was courageous and resilient, accepting and overcoming enormous chal- lenges in his career. he resisted academic bullying and placed stern demands on those in positions of authority. at the same time, he was extremely kind and understanding in his treatment of students and junior colleagues. he attained an enviable reputation among those he worked with for honesty, intellectual rigour and professionalism. bob suffered progressively declining health over the last 6 years of his life, although his illness did not halt his academic work. he published 22 papers during that period. from 2009 until a few weeks before his death, bob worked together with carl smith on a new book on fish reproduction, which bob saw successfully to completion. despite his ill- ness, bob devoted himself to what would be his last major piece of academic work, and it is testimony to his extraordinary tenacity, and intellectual and physi- cal endurance, that he was able to do so. the book will be another of his many legacies to the field of fish biology. on the 3rd march 2014, robert ‘bob’ wootton passed away at his home in aberystwyth in west wales. he was 71. one can only imagine how much better our science and culture would have been were bob with us a little longer. he will be greatly missed by his colleagues and family. references gibson, g. 2005. the synthesis and evolution of a supermodel. science 307: 1890–1891. heins, d.c. 2012. a research programme in fish ecology leads to a supermodel: a tribute to professor robert j. woot- ton. ecology of freshwater fish 21: 323–324.  