ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 1 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved editorial ó 2007 the authors journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish international conference on the conservation and management of arctic charr on wednesday the 30th june 2004, 70 delegates from 12 countries gathered in scotland to attend a confer- ence on the conservation and management of arctic charr. the 3-day meeting saw an exploration of the science underpinning the conservation of salvelinus_alpinus. thirty-four papers were presented as verbal and poster contributions, summarising and extending our knowledge on the status of its diversity, theoretical barriers to its conservation and management and conservation threats. the species, unusually for a primarily scientiﬁc meeting, the conference was asked to draw conclusions from its deliberations, distilling the thinking from the collected wisdom of those at the leading edge of research, management and conservation of this very unusual species. this was achieved by dedicating 1 day, following the more formal conference, to a series of workshops and was very successful. during discus- sions a signiﬁcant consensus developed over many issues, and where this was possible, a clear conference resolution was deﬁned and the rationale supporting this resolution articulated. these resolutions are pub- lished in a short paper in this volume with the hope that politicians, ﬁshery managers and others will be made aware of them and take action. this conference was one component part of a wider programme of collaboration in research and in sharing best practice in wild population management and in aquaculture across europe. this collaboration in- volved a very large number of organisations and individuals coming together under the eu funded collaborative programme ‘charrnet’. a number of papers appearing in this volume are the direct result of collaboration between individuals and organisations within this highly successful programme. additional support for the conference speciﬁcally came from the royal society of edinburgh, scottish natural heritage and english nature. this special volume, resulting from both verbal and poster papers presented at the conference was made possible by dr erik mortensen, founding editor of the ecology of freshwater fish and signiﬁcant contributor to our knowledge of arctic charr. sadly dr mortensen passed away a few days after returning from this conference. we dedicate this volume to his memory. colin e. adams colin w. bean john eccles david fraser peter s. maitland doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00202.x 1  