ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 124–132 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved ó 2007 the authors journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish potential impacts of a recent and rapidly spreading coloniser of australian freshwaters: oriental weatherloach (misgurnus anguillicaudatus) keller rp, lake ps. potential impacts of a recent and rapidly spreading coloniser of australian freshwaters: oriental weatherloach (misgurnus anguillicaudatus). ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 124–132. ó 2007 the authors. journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard abstract – oriental weatherloach (misgurnus anguillicaudatus), a benthic freshwater ﬁsh species native to east asia, was ﬁrst recorded in australian freshwater systems in 1984. although this species is widely established around the world, very little is known about its potential impacts as an invader. we gathered ﬁeld data to parameterise a mesocosm experiment investigating the impacts of oriental weatherloach in southeastern australia. during this experiment, oriental weatherloach caused signiﬁcant reductions in macroinvertebrate numbers and biomass. additionally, oriental weatherloach were associated with elevated ammonia, nitrate/nitrite (nox), and turbidity levels. because of issues involved in scaling up mesocosm experiments we are not able to conclusively determine that oriental weatherloach are having large impacts in natural systems. our results come from mesocosms designed to mimic natural conditions, however, and they thus indicate that ecological impacts may be occurring, and underline the need for further research and control. r. p. keller, p. s. lake school of biological sciences, monash university, clayton, vic., australia key words: invasion biology; ﬁsh; invertebrate communities; water quality; introduced species r. p. keller, school of biological sciences, monash university, clayton, vic. 3800, australia; e-mail: rkeller2@nd.edu present address: r. p. keller, department of biological sciences, university of notre dame, notre dame, in 46556, usa. accepted for publication july 28, 2006 introduction invasive species have greatly altered freshwater eco- systems worldwide, with impacts including loss of biodiversity (moyle & leidy 1992; allan & flecker 1993; richter et al. 1997), reduced ranges of native species (e.g., townsend 1996), introduction of para- sites (e.g., dove & ernst 1998; bond 2005) and habitat changes (e.g., bially & macisaac 2000). these impacts are likely to continue for the foreseeable future, with nonindigenous species predicted to be the single greatest driver of global biodiversity loss in lakes, and the third greatest in streams, over the next century (sala et al. 2000). approximately 34 nonindigenous freshwater ﬁsh species are established in australia (lintermans 2004). although little has been published regarding the impacts of these species, it is known that brown_trout (salmo_trutta) can exclude the native mountain galaxias (galaxias olidus) and change invertebrate communities in streams (fletcher 1986); carp (cypri- nus carpio) can increase turbidity and the prevalence of algal blooms in billabongs (king et al. 1997); and mosquitoﬁsh (gambusia holbrooki) prey heavily upon small native ﬁsh (howe et al. 1997; ivantsoff 1999). thus, introduced freshwater ﬁsh are having large impacts on australian freshwater ecosystems, but their overall impacts are not well understood (koehn & mackenzie 2004). oriental weatherloach (misgurnus anguillicauda- tus) are a small (£20 cm total length) bottom-dwelling ﬁsh native to east asia, from russia in the north, through korea, japan, china, vietnam and into burma (berg 1962). they feed by taking sediment into their mouths and ﬁltering out food items, with barbels around the mouth helping to sense prey (watanabe & hidaka 1983). in their native range oriental weath- erloach inhabit both lotic and lentic systems and are particularly prevalent in rice paddies where their activity uproots weeds, and where they are thus 124 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00204.x considered beneﬁcial by rice farmers (kim et al. 1994). the ﬁrst record of oriental weatherloach establishment beyond their native range is in hawaii, where they were released by migrants sometime before 1906 (maciolek 1984). oriental weatherloach are also a popular aquarium ﬁsh, and releases from this industry have led to their establishment in the usa sometime prior to the 1950s (courtenay 1997), the philippines (welcomme 1984), germany (freyhof & korte 2005), mexico (contreras & escalante 1984) and palau (maciolek 1984). this worldwide range continues to expand, as evidenced by the 1999 discovery of a new population in washington state, usa (tabor et al. 2001). recent collections from washington state indicate that this population has either spread 35 km in 2 years or that another population has become established nearby (r. tabor, us fish and wildlife service, personal communica- tion). despite their long history as a non-native species, however, there are no published investigations of oriental weatherloach impacts. from the early 1960s until their sale was banned in 1986, oriental weatherloach were imported to australia by the aquarium industry at a rate of up to 50,000 per (koster et al. 2002a). the ﬁrst conﬁrmed year impacts of oriental weatherloach in australia naturalised population of this species was discovered in the yarra river, victoria, in 1984 (allen 1984). subsequent introductions and population range expan- sions have lead to oriental weatherloach now being established in up to 12 river systems in victoria, four river systems in the australian capital territory and four river systems in new south wales (fig. 1; koster et al. 2002a). a small population was found in queensland, and this was successfully eradicated in 1990 (koster et al. 2002a). given that oriental weatherloach popu- lations in australia are now widespread, and consider- ing that there is currently no known way to eliminate large populations, oriental weatherloach should be considered a permanent part of the australian fauna. we conducted ﬁeld surveys and a mesocosm experiment to investigate the impacts of oriental weatherloach in australian freshwaters. field surveys were brief, and were conducted to determine whether habitat associations, maximum population densities and diet of this species are similar in southeastern australia to other regions where oriental weatherloach have been studied in the ﬁeld. results from these surveys informed the design and parameterisation of a mesocosm experiment that examined the direct effects of oriental weatherloach feeding on invertebrate n population status unknown population established fig. 1. distribution of oriental weatherloach in australia. narrow lines mark catchment boundaries; thicker lines mark state boundaries. although this map overstates the current known range of this species (i.e., we have extrapolated from point data to whole catchments), because there are no practical methods for controlling spread or eradicating populations this map realistically shows the region likely to be affected as current populations expand. catchments where oriental weatherloach have been sampled, but where they are not known to be established, are indicated. because it is unlikely that isolated individuals would be sampled, we consider it probable that most of the ‘unknown’ catchments are in fact invaded. the arrow indicates the approximate location of the ﬁeld surveys and mesocosm experiment. data from koster et al. (2002a). 125 keller & lake communities, and their effects on water column turbidity, nutrient content and phytopigment mass. our ﬁrst hypothesis for the mesocosm experiment was that oriental weatherloach feeding would reduce population size and biomass of benthic invertebrates, which are known from other studies to be their main prey. additionally, we hypothesised that oriental weatherloach would increase turbidity and water column nutrients through bioturbation and excretion. in all cases, we hypothesised that impacts would be positively related to oriental weatherloach density. materials and methods field surveys two creeks (mullum mullum creek, ringwood, and merri creek, coburg) and one pond (jells park, wheelers hill) in the melbourne metropolitan area were each surveyed in early march and may, 2000. surveys were conducted using a backpack electroﬁsh- er (model 12b; smith-root, vancouver, wa, usa) and hand nets when appropriate. all habitats along approx. 500 m reaches were sampled for each creek, with the exception of some pools (<5% of total habitat) in merri creek that were too deep to safely electroﬁsh. all electroﬁshing surveys were single pass, except when speciﬁc habitats were targeted (see below). hand nets were used in jells pond because the water was too turbid to see ﬁsh as they responded to the electroshocker. captured oriental weatherloach were killed on site with an overdose of benzocaine (ethyl-p-aminobenzoate) (schreck & moyle 1990). we were speciﬁcally interested in maximum den- sities of oriental weatherloach so that we could create mesocosm treatments representing the range of natural densities. densities were estimated by dividing the number of ﬁsh captured in a habitat by an estimate of the area sampled. in creeks, we sampled all pools, rifﬂes and backwaters. estimated densities were higher in muddy backwaters than other habitats, so, for efﬁciency, we concentrated our sampling in back- waters. we found the same pattern during the may sampling period when highest densities were also found in muddy backwaters. again, we concentrated our sampling on these habitats. these backwaters were small and we could thus conduct the equivalent of multiple pass electroﬁshing. to do this we would ﬁsh the area once, wait several minutes and then repeat. numbers captured during the second pass were always low (£30% of total ﬁsh caught). because we had to drag hand nets through mud to capture ﬁsh in jells pond it was not possible to estimate densities for this habitat. to determine whether oriental weatherloach feed in the same way in southeastern australia as in japan (watanabe & hidaka 1983), we removed the entire gut 126 tracts of 36 captured ﬁsh. invertebrates in these samples were quantiﬁed to the lowest possible taxo- nomic level. plant material, such as macrophytes, algae and diatoms, was also searched for and identiﬁed at this level, using a compound microscope when necessary. chironomid, ostracod and oligochaete body parts were prevalent in oriental weatherloach guts, but quantifying actual consumption for these taxa is not straightforward. chironomid head capsules and ostra- cod valves decompose slowly and could be ingested as oriental weatherloach forage for other food. to reduce the risk of overcounting these taxa, we only counted ostracods when the valves were found connected, and chironomids when some soft tissue remained attached to the head capsule. these were considered indications that the invertebrates had been consumed alive. oligochaetes are rapidly digested in ﬁsh guts and the only evidence of their consumption is the presence of setae. we recorded the presence of setae, but made no attempt the presence of setae cautiously because, as for chirono- mid heads and single ostracod valves, they could be inadvertently ingested as oriental weatherloach feed. to quantify abundance. we interpret mesocosm experiment based on our survey results, we conducted our mesocosm experiment during autumn/winter when realistically sized mesocosms could represent the cool season habitat of this species. to ensure that the habitat was also realistic, we introduced a muddy substrate to the mesocosms. twelve outdoor meso- cosms (1.4 · 0.5 m), placed on the ground, were ﬁlled to a depth of 10 cm with sediment from a local pond. tap water was added to give a total depth of 25 cm. mesocosms were left undisturbed for 2 weeks to allow invertebrates (mostly oligochaetes, chironomids and ostracods, see results) introduced with the sediment to settle. two densities of oriental weatherloach (one and )2, respectively) three ﬁsh per tub or 1.4 and 4.3 ﬁshæm were established and each replicated four times. four )2), and mesocosms were retained as controls (0 ﬁshæm the experiment ran undisturbed for 67 days beginning in mid-may, 2000 (see below). treatments and sampling order were randomly assigned, and mesocosms were covered with shade cloth to prevent the entry of detritus. this experiment was conducted in the jock marshall reserve at monash university, clayton campus. although water temperatures in the mesocosms were not measured they would have closely tracked air temperature because mesocosms were placed on the ground and thus had a large exposed surface area. average 24-h air temperature maxima and minima during the experiment were, respectively, 15.4 and 9.1 °c (http://www.bom.gov.au). the 16 ﬁsh used in the mesocosm experiment were captured from mullum mullum creek and allowed to acclimate at the jock marshall reserve for 2 weeks prior to the experiment. they ranged in length from 101 to 171 mm (mean ± sd ¼ 126 ± 21 mm) and were randomly assigned to the treatment mesocosms. we divided each mesocosm into 64 separate grid cells, and used this grid to locate sampling sites. to ensure that no cell was sampled twice, all sampling sites for each mesocosm were randomly assigned (without replacement) before the experiment began. to determine the effects of oriental weatherloach feeding on invertebrates we took eight sediment cores (depth ¼ 5 cm, diameter ¼ 4.7 cm, volume ¼ 86.7 cm3) before ﬁsh were added, and again at the end of the experiment. samples were washed through a 250- lm sieve and all invertebrates removed live. inverte- brates were preserved in 70% ethanol and later counted and identiﬁed. initial cores were taken between 15 and 25 may 2000, and the ﬁnal cores between 20 and 30 july 2000. after identiﬁcation, all invertebrates were dried in a 60 °c oven and aggregated by treatment and sampling time. change in weight from before the experiment to the ﬁnal samples was taken as an indication of total biomass change during the experiment. because all mesocosms were covered with shade cloth they were isolated from aerial recruitment of invertebrates. this is unlikely to have affected results as chironomids are the only such group found in large numbers, and winter recruitment by this family is rare. also, because all mesocosms were covered in shade cloth no treatment-level bias could be intro- duced. water samples were taken from each mesocosm at the end of the experiment, but before the ﬁnal invertebrate cores were removed. turbidity in each water sample was determined using a hach model 2100a turbidimeter (hach company, loveland, co, usa). samples were also analysed for nitrate and nitrite (nox-n), soluble reactive phosphorus (srp-p) and ammonia-n concentrations using flow injection analysis (lachat quickchem 8000, lachat instru- ments, loveland, co, usa). an additional 100 ml of water was collected from each mesocosm the day before the experiment ended for chlorophyll analysis. chlorophyll a and phaeo- phytin levels in each sample were quantiﬁed using a spectrophotometer according to standard methods (apha 1995). total phytopigment (chlorophyll a plus phaeophytin) mass was established using the lorenzen (1967) equations. data analysis direct effects of oriental weatherloach feeding (i.e., effects on invertebrate numbers and biomass) were impacts of oriental weatherloach in australia analysed by one-way anova. proportional change from before samples to after samples was used as the dependent variable, with treatment as the independent )2). repeated measures variable (4.3, 1.4 or 0 ﬁshæm anova was not appropriate because initial invertebrate densities varied among tubs (see results). tukey’s test was used to test for signiﬁcant differences between paired treatments, and log10(x+1) transformations were used in each analysis to meet anova assumptions. our analysis of proportional change assumes a correlation between before and after samples. to test this assumption we conducted correlations of the total number of invertebrates observed between the begin- ning and the end of the experiment for each treatment level. chlorophyll and water quality samples were only taken at the end of the experiment. in each of these cases we assumed that no signiﬁcant differences existed among treatments before the experiment because tub treatment was randomly assigned. thus, we analysed these results with one-way anova. any pre-existing differences would have added noise to the analyses, and would thus make our tests conservative (i.e., less likely to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant result). results field surveys oriental weatherloach were found in all habitats (rifﬂe, pool, backwater) surveyed during march, with highest estimated densities occurring in backwaters. from sampling approximately 20 backwaters in mullum mullum and merri creeks, we found densities to be in )2, and most commonly the range of 1–5 ﬁshæm (50% of backwaters) 2–3 ﬁshæm )2. during the may sampling period oriental weatherloach were over- whelmingly captured as they came out of ﬁne sediments in muddy backwaters (again, approximately )2, 20 backwaters sampled), at densities of 2–7 ﬁshæm and most commonly in the range (60% of backwa- )2. similar densities have been ters) of 4–5 ﬁshæm recorded elsewhere in australia. during single-pass electroﬁshing surveys of cobble and silt substrate in the urban ginninderra creek (australian capital territory) during the late 1980s and early 1990s, mark lintermans (unpublished data) regularly cap- tured oriental weatherloach at densities of 3–5 ﬁsh- )2. the seasonal pattern observed during our æm surveys is also consistent with previous surveys (sterba 1962; lintermans 1993). importantly, we note here that oriental weatherloach do not ﬂoat when shocked and are therefore difﬁcult to catch relative to other ﬁsh species. densities of captured ﬁsh should thus be considered minimum estimates of true densi- ties. 127 keller & lake thirty-six oriental weatherloach were examined for gut contents. nine of these were caught during march 2000 in jells park pond, and all contained chirono- mids, ostracods, gastropods and cladocerans. addi- tionally, large numbers of oligochaete setae were present in all nine of these ﬁsh. the remaining oriental weatherloach were captured during may 2000, in mullum mullum and merri creeks. nineteen of these ﬁsh had no identiﬁable invertebrates in their guts, and the remaining eight had small numbers of chironomids and/or mites (£18 invertebrates per ﬁsh). twelve of the 27 ﬁsh captured during may also contained oligocha- ete setae. no other material was found in oriental weatherloach guts during either season in quantities that would suggest it was a food source. additionally, we observed that most ﬁsh caught during may had fatty deposits around their heart, liver and gut. for ﬁsh caught during all seasons <10% of the total number of chironomids and ostracods were discarded because of concerns about whether they were alive when consumed (see materials and methods). these results suggest that feeding rates are much higher when water temperature is high. average temperatures of dande- nong creek, a creek near our sampling sites, was 18.6 °c during the march (warm) sampling, and 11.7 °c during the may (cool) sampling (http:// www.vicwaterdata.net). mesocosm experiment the mean number of macroinvertebrates in each before sediment core ranged from ﬁve to 18. across all mesocosms, oligochaetes made up 59% of total invertebrates, chironomids 31% and ostracods 10%. other taxa made up less than 1%. at the end of the experiment the number of invertebrates in each core (averaged for each mesocosm) ranged from ﬁve to 38, with oligochaetes making up 62% of the total across mesocosms, chironomids 13% and ostracods 25%. again, other total invertebrates sampled. taxa accounted for <1% of oriental weatherloach densities were signiﬁcantly negatively related to changes in numbers of total macroinvertebrates, and the high-density ﬁsh treat- ment signiﬁcantly reduced chironomids compared to the low density and control treatments (fig. 2). proportional change in ostracod and oligochaete numbers was not signiﬁcantly related to treatment, although each showed a decreasing trend as ﬁsh density increased. macroinvertebrate dry mass was signiﬁcantly reduced as oriental weatherloach densi- ties increased (anova p ¼ 0.009, three-ﬁsh treatment signiﬁcantly lower than both control and one-ﬁsh treatment with tukey’s test). total numbers of inver- tebrates between before and after sampling were total animals (p = 0.002) a a a a b b control control control 1-fish 1-fish 1-fish 3-fish 3-fish 3-fish chironomids (p = 0.035) ab ab a a b b control control control 1-fish 1-fish 1-fish 3-fish 3-fish 3-fish (b) 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 –1 (d) 36 36 30 30 24 24 18 18 12 12 6 6 0 0 oligochaetes (p = 0.113) control control control 1-fish 1-fish 1-fish 3-fish 3-fish 3-fish ostracods (p = 0.748) control control control 1-fish 1-fish 1-fish 3-fish 3-fish 3-fish treatment treatment (a) 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 –1 (c) 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 –1 t n e m i r e p x e  g n i r u d e g n a h c l a n o i t r o p o r p 128 fig. 2. proportional change (± 1se) of invertebrate numbers in mesocosms con- taining different densities of oriental weath- erloach. total animals (a) is the sum of oligochaetes (b), chironomids (c) and ostra- cods (d). control mesocosms had no ﬁsh added; one-ﬁsh mesocosms had one orien- tal weatherloach added (¼1.4 ﬁshæm )2); three-ﬁsh treatments had three oriental weatherloach added (¼4.3 ﬁshæm )2). over- all one-way anova test signiﬁcance is ind- icated, and different letters over the bars indicate signiﬁcant differences between tre- atments (tukey’s test). data were log trans- to anova. note different formed prior scales. positively correlated in the three-ﬁsh (pearson’s r ¼ 0.90) and one-ﬁsh (r ¼ 0.57) treatments, while there was a weak negative correlation (r ¼ )0.15) for the control mesocosms. this ﬁnal correlation was inﬂuenced by a low range of initial values (range of average animals per core for each control meso- cosm ¼ 7–11 vs. 5–18 and 5–17, respectively, for the one-ﬁsh and three-ﬁsh treatments) meaning that there was low power the expected positive correlation if it existed. the expected difference may also have been swamped by relatively small variations in the consistently large increases in invertebrates in the control mesocosms. finally, we note that although the control mesocosms did not conform to our expectation of positive correlations, they did clearly show the hypothesised release from weatherloach predation. to detect nitrogen in the form of both ammonia-n and nox, and water turbidity, increased signiﬁcantly with ori- ental weatherloach density (fig. 3). srp-p levels (fig. 3) and total phytopigment mass (p ¼ 0.64) were not dependent on treatment. discussion in mesocosms designed to mimic natural conditions oriental weatherloach reduced population sizes of their macroinvertebrate prey relative to ﬁshless con- impacts of oriental weatherloach in australia trols. in addition, mesocosms with oriental weather- loach had higher water column nitrogen and turbidity levels than ﬁshless controls. these impacts were found during cool months at oriental weatherloach densities known to occur in local freshwater systems. to our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study to investigate the impacts of this species. although there are issues involved in extrapolating mesocosm results to natural systems (see below), our results demonstrate that nonindigenous populations of oriental weatherloach may be altering macroinvertebrate communities. this could have many impacts, including depriving native ﬁsh species of food resources. gut analysis of ﬁsh captured from jells park pond conﬁrms that, as elsewhere, oriental weatherloach are benthic and interstitial predators of macroinverte- brates. the food sources available to oriental weath- erloach in the mesocosms matched this proﬁle, and populations of chironomids, and of total macroinver- tebrates, were signiﬁcantly reduced in treatment mesocosms relative to ﬁshless controls. although ostracod and oligochaete populations were not signi- ﬁcantly reduced, each showed the expected trend of reduced populations as ﬁsh density increased. overall, the total number of invertebrates in control mesocosms increased to three times its starting value over the 67 days experiment, while in the high-density tubs the number of invertebrates declined during the same ) 1 – l g m ( n o i t a r t n e c n o c t n e i r t u n (a) 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 (c) 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.00 ammonia – n(p = 0.038) b ab a control 1-fish 3-fish srp – p(p = 0.312) control 1-fish 3-fish (b) 0.15 0.10 nox – n(p = 0.030) b ab 0.05 a 0.00 (d) 10 8 6 4 2 0 s t i n u y t i i d b r u t c i r t l e m o e h p e n treatment control 1-fish 3-fish turbidity (p = 0.017) b a a control 1-fish 3-fish 129 fig. 3. average water column nutrient con- centrations and turbidity (±1se) in meso- cosms containing different densities of oriental weatherloach. control mesocosms had no oriental weatherloach added; one- ﬁsh mesocosms had one oriental weather- loach added (¼1.4 ﬁshæm three-ﬁsh treatments had three oriental weatherloach added (¼4.3 ﬁshæm )2). overall one-way anova test signiﬁcance is indicated, and different indicate signiﬁcant differences between treatments (tukey’s test). note different scales. letters over )2); the bars keller & lake period (fig. 2). if this magnitude of impact is also observed in creeks and ponds we believe it would negatively impact other organisms relying on this food source. the mesocosm experiment looked at a number of indirect ecosystem effects of oriental weatherloach activity and found that some of these may be important. first, we found that the treatment meso- cosms had higher turbidity relative to control meso- cosms, most likely as a result of ﬁsh foraging behaviour. second, oriental weatherloach treatment mesocosms had elevated water column nox-n and ammonia-n levels relative to control mesocosms. as with turbidity, it is likely that increased mixing of sediment with the water column is responsible for the elevated nox, as this mixing would release nitrogen in this form. the elevated ammonia-n, however, is more likely to be a result of oriental weatherloach excretion. in contrast to turbidity and nitrogen levels, water column srp-p and total phytopigment mass were not affected by ﬁsh density. our mesocosm experiment has shown that, in terms of turbidity and nitrogen levels, oriental weatherloach have a similar impact on water quality to carp (cyprinus carpio) (breukelaar et al. 1994; king et al. 1997; robertson et al. 1997). robertson et al. (1997) also showed increased algal production in the pres- ence of carp, but were unable to deﬁnitely explain its cause. in our experiment algal growth was not limited by nitrogen availability because it did not respond to increased nitrogen levels in the treatment mesocosms. instead, it may have been limited by phosphorus availability or the relatively low light conditions caused by the season (autumn/winter) and shade cloth. the mesocosm experiment was conducted during cooler months, and simulated oriental weatherloach densities that our ﬁeld surveys found to be common during this season. our gut analysis results, and results from other studies (naruse & oishi 1996) indicate that oriental weatherloach are more active and feed at a greater rate during summer, and it is thus possible that impacts in summer would be greater than was seen in our experiment. however, further research will be needed to determine how summer impacts compare with those found by this study. in particular, it is possible that increased invertebrate production in summer would swamp the effects of oriental weath- erloach feeding. this may be particularly true for chironomids, which do not recruit during the months that the mesocosm experiment was performed. it is also possible that oriental weatherloach are more vulnerable to capture in winter because they are concentrated in small backwaters. again, we empha- sise the need for further research on the seasonal behaviour and impacts of this species. 130 while our results suggest experience different disturbance signiﬁcant oriental weatherloach impacts, three caveats associated with mesocosm studies need to be considered. first, animals conﬁned to mesocosms may be released from predators and/or competitors and thus show greater rates of feeding. for the present study, this would lead to increased effects on invertebrate numbers and increased effects of bioturbation. second, there may be fewer refugia for invertebrates in mesocosms than in natural habitats, thus offering fewer opportunities to escape predation. third, mesocosms are isolated from natural systems and thus and ﬂow regimes relative to natural systems. disturbances such as ﬂoods may swamp any impacts of oriental weatherloach on invertebrates, and the effect of ﬂow in creeks may change the pattern of impacts, particularly in terms of turbidity and nutrients. these effects would be less in standing waters, where oriental weatherloach are also commonly found. we consider it likely that oriental weather- loach effects on turbidity and nutrient levels would be important in standing waters, but the effects in streams require more study. in any case, increasing nitrogen levels in urban aquatic ecosystems is not desirable. the mesocosm results in terms of invertebrate popula- tions, but our results clearly support further inves- tigation of oriental weatherloach impacts, preferably at larger spatial scales. is more difﬁcult to interpret it the invasion of australian freshwaters by oriental weatherloach is at an intermediate stage; the species is now a permanent part of the australian fauna, and its range is likely to continue expanding. although there is some concern about this species, as evidenced by their eradication from a stream in queensland (koster et al. 2002a) and a recent management plan for the species in the murray darling basin (koster et al. 2002b), oriental weatherloach has not yet been conclusively shown to have impacts in natural systems. our mesocosm experiment represents the only experimental assessment of possible impacts, and suggests that oriental weatherloach may alter macro- invertebrate communities and water quality in lakes and streams. these results emphasise the need for further research, and until more results are available we suggest that efforts to restrict the spread of this species continue. acknowledgements thanks to all who helped us in the ﬁeld, and especially to steve cassar for the time and energy he gave to the project. dennis o’dowd and tarmo raadik each provided valuable assistance throughout the project. this work was partially funded by the centre for assessment and management of biological invasions (cambi) at monash university, clayton campus. gerry quinn and ralph macnally assisted with experimental design and statistics. this manuscript was greatly improved by comments from david lodge, jonathan bossenbroek and an anonymous referee. references allan, j.d. & flecker, a.s. 1993. biodiversity conservation in running waters: identifying the major factors that threaten destruction of riverine species and ecosystems. bioscience 43: 32–43. allen, s. 1984. occurrence of juvenile weatherﬁsh misgurnus anguillicaudatus (pisces: cobitidae) in the yarra river. the victorian naturalist 101: 240–242. apha 1995. standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, 19th edn. washington, dc: american public health association. 1325 pp. berg, l.s. 1962. freshwater ﬁshes of the ussr and adjacent countries, vol. 2. jerusalem: israel program for scientiﬁc translations. 496 pp. bially, a. & macisaac, h.j. 2000. fouling mussels (dreissena spp.) colonize soft sediments in lake erie and facilitate benthic invertebrates. freshwater biology 43: 85–97. bond, n.r. 2005. the effects of an introduced parasite, lernaea cyprinacea, on a lowland population of galaxius olidus, a small native australian ﬁsh. the victorian naturalist 121: 194–198. breukelaar, a.w., lammens, e.h. & breteler, j.g. 1994. effects of benthivorous bream (abramis brama) and carp (cyprinus carpio) on sediment resuspension and concentra- tions of nutrients and chlorophyll-a. freshwater biology 32: 113–121. contreras, s.b. & escalante, m.a. 1984. distribution and known impacts of exotic ﬁshes in mexico. in: courtenay, w.r. & stauffer, j.r., eds. distribution, biology, and management of exotic ﬁshes. baltimore, md: the john hopkins university press, pp. 102–130. courtenay, w.r. 1997. nonindigenous ﬁshes in florida. in: simberloff, d., schmitz, d.c. & brown, t.c., eds. strangers in paradise: impact and management of nonindigenous species in florida. washington, dc: island press, pp. 109–122. dove, a.d.m. & ernst, i. 1998. concurrent invaders – four exotic species of monogenea now established on exotic freshwater ﬁshes in australia. for parasitology 28: 1755–1764. international journal fletcher, a.r. 1986. effects of introduced ﬁsh in australia. in: dedeckker, p. & williams, w., eds. limnology in australia. dordrecht: csiro/dr w. junk, pp. 231–238. freyhof, j. & korte, e. 2005. the ﬁrst record of misgurnus anguillicaudatus in germany. journal of fish biology 66: 568–571. howe, e., howe, c., lim, r. & burchett, m. 1997. impact of the introduced poeciliid gambusia holbrooki (girard, 1859) on the growth and reproduction of pseudomugil signifer (kner, 1865) in australia. marine and freshwater research 48: 425–434. ivantsoff, w. 1999. detection of predation on australian native ﬁshes by gambusia holbrooki. marine and freshwater research 50: 467–468. impacts of oriental weatherloach in australia kim, h.c., soon, m. & yu, h.s. 1994. biological control of vector mosquitos by the use of ﬁsh predators, moroco oxycephalus and misgurnus anguillicaudatus in the labora- tory and semi-ﬁeld rice paddy. korean journal of entomol- ogy 24: 269–284. king, a.j., robertson, a.i. & healey, m.r. 1997. experimental manipulations of the biomass of introduced carp (cyprinus carpio) in billabongs. i. impacts on water-column properties. marine and freshwater research 48: 435–443. koehn, j.d. & mackenzie, r.f. 2004. priority management actions for alien freshwater ﬁsh species in australia. new zealand journal of marine and freshwater research 38: 457– 472. koster, w.m., raadik, t.a. & clunie, p. (2002a). scoping study of the potential spread and impact of the exotic ﬁsh oriental weatherloach in the murray-darling basin, austra- lia: a resource document. melbourne: arthur rylah institute for environmental research. 78 pp. koster, w.m., raadik, t.a. & clunie, p. (2002b). scoping study of the potential spread and impact of the exotic ﬁsh oriental weatherloach in the murray-darling basin, austra- lia: a draft management strategy. melbourne: arthur rylah institute for environmental research. 15 pp. lintermans, m. 1993. oriental weatherloach misgurnus angu- illicaudatus in the cotter river: a new population in the canberra region. canberra: act parks and conservation service. 22 pp. lintermans, m. 2004. human-assisted dispersal of alien freshwater ﬁsh in australia. new zealand journal of marine and freshwater research 38: 481–501. lorenzen, c. 1967. determination of chlorophyll and pheo- pigments: spectrophotometric equations. limnology and oceanography 12: 343–346. maciolek, j.a. 1984. exotic ﬁshes in hawaii and other islands in: courtenay, w.r. & stauffer, j.r., eds. of oceania. distribution, biology, and management of exotic ﬁshes. baltimore, md: the john hopkins university press, pp. 131–176. moyle, p.b. & leidy, r.a. 1992. loss of biodiversity in aquatic ecosystems: evidence from ﬁsh faunas. in: fiedler, p.l. & jain, s.k., eds. conservation biology: the theory and practice of nature conservation, preservation and management. new york: chapman & hall, pp. 127–169. naruse, m. & oishi, t. 1996. annual and daily activity rhythms of loaches in an irrigation creek and ditches around paddy ﬁelds. environmental biology of fishes 47: 93–99. richter, b.d., braun, d.p., mendelson, m.a. & master, l.l. 1997. threats to imperiled freshwater fauna. conservation biology 11: 1081–1093. robertson, a.i., healey, m.r. & king, a.j. (1997). experi- mental manipulations of the biomass of introduced carp (cyprinus carpio) in billabongs. ii. impacts on benthic properties and processes. marine and freshwater research 48: 445–454. sala, o.e., chapin, f.s., armesto, j.j., berlow, e., bloomﬁeld, j., dirzo, r., huber-sanwald, e., huenneke, l.f., jackson, r.b., kinzig, a., leemans, r., lodge, d.m., mooney, h.a., oesterheld, m., poff, n.l., sykes, m.t., walker, b.h., walker, m. & wall, d.h. 2000. global biodiversity scenarios for the year 2100. science 287: 1770–1774. 131 keller & lake schreck, c.b. & moyle, p.b. 1990. methods for ﬁsh biology. bethesda, md: american fisheries society. 684 pp. sterba, g. 1962. freshwater ﬁshes of the world. london: vista books. 879 pp. tabor, r.e., warner, e. & hager, s. 2001. an oriental weatherﬁsh (misgurnus anguillicaudatus) population estab- lished in washington state. northwest science 75: 72–76. townsend, c.r. 1996. invasion biology and ecological impacts of brown_trout salmo_trutta in new zealand. biological conservation 78: 13–22. watanabe, k. & hidaka, t. 1983. feeding behaviour of the japanese loach, misgurnus anguillicaudatus (cobitidae). journal of ethology 1: 86–90. welcomme, r.l. 1984. international transfers of inland ﬁsh species. in: courtenay, w.r. & stauffer, j.r., eds. distribu- tion, biology, and management of exotic ﬁshes. baltimore, md: the johns hopkins university press, pp. 22–40. 132  