ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 191–197 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved ó 2007 the authors journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish persistence of ﬁsh populations in the upper parana´ river: effects of water regulation by dams gubiani e´ a, gomes lc, agostinho aa, okada ek. persistence of ﬁsh populations in the upper parana´ river: effects of water regulation by dams. ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 191–197. ó 2007 the authors. journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard abstract – river–ﬂoodplain systems present intense temporal variations in physical, chemical and biological factors. these variations are closely related to alterations in water levels, which have been attributed to the ﬂood pulse. as several species are strictly related to the ﬂood pulse to fulﬁl their life cycle, the pulse may be seen as a dispersal mechanism of species onto a ﬂoodplain. in this study, we determine how dam construction inﬂuenced the persistence of prochilodus lineatus population, a large migratory ﬁsh species from the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain. data used were collected in two distinct periods, from april 1992 to march 1993 and from january 1999 to december 2001. fish were collected using seining nets in six (monthly in the ﬁrst period) and seven (quarterly in the second period) isolated lagoons. the fraction of occupied lagoons was high in the ﬁrst period (higher than 0.65), when ﬂood was intense. however, in the second period, when the ﬂood pulse did not happen or was short, the fraction of occupied lagoons sharply decreased over time (from 0.85 to 0.22). for the ﬁrst period, no model ﬁtted to data, but for the second period, a negative linear model (named drought-dependent model) presented good ﬁt (r2 ¼ 0.97). therefore, it is possible to infer that long and intense ﬂood pulses are important to maintain the persistence of p. lineatus populations in the ﬂoodplain. the artiﬁcial control of water levels prompted by dams disrupts this dynamic, reducing persistence to critical levels. e´. a. gubiani1, l. c. gomes1,2, a. a. agostinho1,2, e. k. okada2 1graduate course in inland aquatic environments, department of biology, 2nucleus of research in limnology, ichthyology and aquaculture (nupe´lia), maringa´ state university, avenida colombo, maringa´, parana´, brazil key words: ﬂoodplain; ﬂood pulse; persistence e´. a. gubiani, graduate course in inland aquatic environments, department of biology, maringa´ state university, avenida colombo, 5790 maringa´, parana´ 87020-900, brazil; e-mail: eagubiani@nupelia.uem.br accepted for publication october 13, 2006 introduction natural populations are subject to random ﬂuctua- tions, because environmental conditions vary sto- chastically, inﬂuencing birth and death rates, and thus, populations have a non-zero probability of extinction at all times. distribution of organisms in natural landscapes (usually a mosaic of habitats) is rarely homogeneous and a population may be divided in subpopulations (karieva 1990) or a metapopula- tion, which means in the simplest sense, population of populations (levins 1969; hanski & gilpin 1996; hanski 1999). therefore, even if a local population goes extinct, the metapopulation can persist on a regional scale. the ability of a population surviving for many generations is deﬁned as persistence (hixon et al. 2002). the spatial dynamics of interconnected subpopula- tions may vary from little to complete isolation. in addition, because of extinction or migration of local populations along the landscape, not all available habitats are occupied, which will certainly inﬂuence persistence of a population in a regional scale. some factors inﬂuencing these are distance among occupied areas, geographic barriers and ability of dispersion (harrison & taylor 1996). however, there are few studies dealing with populations in ﬂoodplain. forms of floodplains are particular landscapes, which present high temporal variations on physical, chemical and biological properties, mainly related to oscillations in water level. these oscillations play a central role in the interpretation of ecological pro- cesses of these systems, what motivated the formula- tion of the ﬂood pulse concept (junk et al. 1989; neiff doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00211.x 191 gubiani et al. 1990). nevertheless, impoundments usually modify the original river water regime, leading to diminished ﬂooded area downriver, decreasing connectivity, and, consequently, biodiversity of isolated habitats (lagoons) may be severely threatened by the absence of ﬂoods. therefore, the ﬂood pulse can be considered a mechanism that maintains population persistence because it disperses individuals among the several ﬂoodplain habitats, especially for species closely dependent on the pulse, long distance migratory species (agostinho et al. 2003, 2005). such as dams the understanding of constructed upstream from the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain control river discharge, limiting ﬂoods, altering the dispersal mechanism of several species. thus, as ﬂood decreases, the disper- sion of various populations also decreases with consequences on the maintenance of local and regional biodiversity. therefore, the effects of ﬂood regulation on extinction and colonisa- tion rates is fundamental to solve several questions in ecology and conservation of ﬂoodplains (sensu hanski & gilpin 1996; levin et al. 1997; hixon et al. 2002). considering this scenario, the present work evaluates the inﬂuence of dam construction on the persistence of prochilodus lineatus (valenciennes, 1836) population, a in the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain. speciﬁcally, we intend to answer the following question: how did the construc- tion of a large dam (porto primavera in 1998) inﬂuence the persistence of the species in the stretch below, where the plain is located? large migratory ﬁsh species, material and methods study area and sites the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain is located between porto primavera dam and itaipu reservoir (fig. 1). this is the last stretch of the parana´ river within the brazilian territory without dams. in this area (230 km long), marginal lagoons (temporary or not) are abun- dant, usually fed by groundwater, local rains, channels connected with the main river or by seasonal ﬂoods. water reduction during dry periods contributes to create several pools. therefore, the ﬂood pulse is considered the main force driving ﬂoodplain function- ing (agostinho et al. 2004), and it varies in intensity over time, or sometimes it does not happen. however, after the construction of several dams in the upper parana´, water level became less variable and it may be absent more frequently. then, two periods of different water levels are considered. the ﬁrst period (april 1992 to march 1993) was charac- terised by an intense ﬂood whereas the second period (january 1999 to december 2001), the ﬂood pulse was absent or short. in this study, 192 lagoons sampled in the ﬁrst period (group 1) are located in two islands of the upper parana´ river: porto rico (canal do meio and pontal lagoons) and mutum (porto rico, pau ve´io, treˆs irma˜os and mutum lagoons) (fig. 1). these lagoons are old channels of the parana´ river and are, in general, long shaped with high water ﬂow during ﬂoods. however, these lagoons may fragment (except porto rico) during periods of receding water level and drought, they get isolated, forming smaller pools that may dry out completely. lagoons sampled in the second period (group 2) are spread over the plain, in the rivers ivinheima (ze´ do paco, ventura and capivara lagoons), baia (jacare´, fechada and pousada das garc¸as lagoons) and parana (osmar lagoon) (fig. 1). these lagoons present varied shapes (rounded to longed), sizes and depths, and they are disconnected from the main river channel. water level and samplings water levels of the parana´ river were obtained in the ‘posto hidrometereolo´gico de porto sa˜o jose´ (pr)’, supplied by dnaee (departamento nacional de a´ gua e energia ele´trica). we opted to present historical data (from 1964 to 2001) to show the inﬂuence of dams in the upper parana´ river water level and detailed data of the studied periods, before and after the construction of porto primavera dam (completely closed in 1998). in the ﬁrst period (april 1992 to march 1993), p. lineatus was collected monthly using seining nets (30 m long and 0.5 cm mesh size). in the second period (january 1999 to december 2001), isolated lagoons were quarterly sampled, using seining nets (20 m long and 0.8 cm mesh size). data analysis trends in water level were identiﬁed graphically. to better determine the historical inﬂuence of dams in the hydrograph, water level data were divided into phases. phase i represents water level of the upper parana´ river main channel without dams. every phase after that (ii, iii and iv) corresponds to the period immediately after the closure of a large dam (jupia´: main channel of the parana´ river; rosana: paranap- anema river, a tributary on the east side of the parana´ river, just above the plain; and porto prima- vera, main channel of the parana´ river, just below jupia´ and above the plain). water level before and after the closure of porto primavera dam (phase iv) was analysed in detail, to show trends related to the sampled periods. abundance of ﬁsh was expressed in number of individuals per 100 m2 of seined area. this abundance was also analysed graphically, to identify trends over time. in addition, to evaluate persistence, abundance fish populations in the upper parana´ river fig. 1. location of the sampled lagoons in the upper parana´ river (group 1: ﬁrst period; group 2: second period). data of p. lineatus (lagoons and months, separated by periods) were transformed in presence (1) and absence (0). the fraction of occupied lagoons by the popula- tion (f) was calculated dividing the number of occupied lagoons in a given month by the total number of lagoons sampled in the same month. 193 gubiani et al. values of f were plotted against time and persistence was modelled using linear regression. to meet assumptions, the regressor variable (t) was ln trans- formed. all calculations were made using the software statisticatm for windows 7.1. results dam construction in the parana´ river altered water levels in the studied region (fig. 2). during phase i, there were few reservoirs above the ﬂoodplain and none in the main channel of the parana´ river. for every large reservoir ﬁlled just above the studied area (jupia´ before phase ii; rosana before phase iii and porto primavera before phase iv), the hydrograph was altered. then, after the closure of porto primavera dam, mean water levels decreased about 40% when fig. 2. changes in water level in the upper parana´ river. each phase corresponds to a period immediately after a closure of a large dam above the studied area, except phase i (natural discharge) (after agostinho et al. 2007). compared with those registered in phase i. these alterations, therefore, severely impacted the biota in the region, including long distance migratory species, such as p. lineatus. considering the studied periods, in the ﬁrst, the ﬂood pulse occurred between april and may 1992 and between november 1992 and february 1993 (fig. 3a). in the second period, from january 1999 to december 2001, there was not a conspicuous ﬂood. only in the beginning of 1999 and in may 2002 occurred pulses (fig. 4a); however, they reached low levels and they were short. abundances of p. lineatus in the area presented high variability (fig. 5). two patterns are of relevance: (i) abundances were higher in the ﬁrst period (fig. 5a) and (ii) for both periods, there were a tendency of decreasing abundances over the reduction in abundance in the ﬁrst period occurred, probably, because p. lineatus abandoned lagoons with the next ﬂood. time. however, persistence was measured by the fraction of occu- pied lagoons, and it was higher in the ﬁrst period, with values always above 0.65. in addition, fraction of occupied lagoons reached 100% during 4 months (fig. 3b). in the second period, there was a tendency of exponential decrease in the fraction of occupied lagoons over this fraction was approximately 0.85 (1999; when a fast, but low-intensity pulse occurred), decreasing to 0.22 at the end of the period (fig. 4b). time. when sampling started, therefore, the 1999 ﬂood had an intensity and duration that worked as a dispersion mechanism of individuals to lagoons of the ﬂoodplain. conversely, in the following years, the ﬂood pulse presented lower intensity and duration, and, therefore, colonisation fig. 3. mean water levels (cm; a) of the upper parana´ river measured near the city of porto rico, between april 1992 and march 1993. continuous line indicates the minimum water level (370 cm) necessary to characterise a ﬂood. the fraction of occupied lagoons by p. lineatus in the period is presented in (b). 194 fish populations in the upper parana´ river fig. 4. mean water levels (cm; a) of the upper parana´ river measured near the city of porto rico, between january 1999 and march 2002. continuous line indicates the minimum water level (370 cm) necessary to characterise a ﬂood. the fraction of occupied lagoons by p. lineatus in the period is presented in (b). fig. 5. abundances of prochilodus lineatus in the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain in the studied periods [(a) april 1992 to march 1993; (b) january 1999 to december 2002). decreased, what reinforces the inﬂuence of the ﬂood on the persistence of p. lineatus in the ﬂoodplain. for the ﬁrst period, it was not possible to ﬁt a model to data (fig. 3b). persistence was inﬂuenced by the ﬂood pulse. when ﬂood inundated the plain, fraction of occupied lagoons reached 100%. this means that all sampled lagoons where occupied, and then, the plain was saturated by p. lineatus. in the second period, however, it was observed a clear exponential decrease in the fraction of occupied lagoons (fig. 4b) which allowed to ﬁt a linear model: f ¼ pe ln (t)+a (r2 ¼ 0.97), herein named drought-dependent model, where pe is the velocity of persistence decrease (extinction rate), and a is deﬁned by the initial condition of the model. in this period, there were no relevant ﬂood pulses. then, the species was not dispersed onto the plain and also, migration was not possible because of reduced connectivity. apparently, the decay in the fraction of occupied lagoons is dependent on the time between ﬂood events. longer the time between ﬂoods, more intense will be the decrease in the fraction of occupied lagoons, with reﬂex on the persistence of p. lineatus. discussion prochilodus lineatus is one of the most studied ﬁsh species in the parana´ river basin (sverlij et al. 1993). it is a long-distance migratory species that depend on the ﬂood pulse to complete its life cycle. juveniles inhabit lagoons of the plain for 1–2 years, where they ﬁnd food and shelter, returning to the main river after a ﬂood (agostinho et al. 1993; gomes & agostinho 1997; agostinho et al. 2003). biological events of migratory species, such as gonad maturation, migra- tion, spawning, larval development and growth are 195 gubiani et al. strictly related to ﬂoods. recruitment success is dependent on the timing and duration of the ﬂoods (gomes & agostinho 1997; agostinho et al. 2003, 2005). in addition, in the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain, juveniles of p. lineatus may represent more than 70% of the ﬁsh biomass in lagoons after a long ﬂood. however, if a ﬂood is short, the species may be completely absent in the region (agostinho & zalewski 1995). in lagoons of the same studied area, agostinho et al. (2004) observed that p. lineatus accounted for 65% of the total ﬁsh biomass, what corroborated the results shown by agostinho et al. (1997) and ferreti et al. (1998). cunico et al. (2002) also discussed the importance of ﬂood duration for lagoons colonisation, noticing, in 1998, an expressive increase in the abundance of p. lineatus in isolated lagoons, after a signiﬁcant ﬂood. we found similar results, with greater abundance of p. lineatus in the ﬁrst period, when the ﬂood pulse was intense. during ﬂood events, the higher connectivity among ﬂoodplain habitats (including the main river channel) allows movement of several ﬁsh species. fish disperse throughout the area, and after water retraction, the landscape becomes again a mosaic of fragmented habitats, similarly what occurs on the mainland–island metapopulation model (gotelli 1991, 2001; hanski 1991, 1999). in this case, the river works as the ‘mainland’ and lagoons as the ‘islands’, and the ﬂood pulse is the dispersal mechanism that intensiﬁes colonisation, as reproduction of migratory ﬁsh species occurs during high water periods, as in the case of p. lineatus. lineatus, the fraction of occupied lagoons (persistence) in the upper parana´ river, for p. is totally dependent on the ﬂood pulse. during the ﬁrst period, no model ﬁtted the data reinforcing the importance of the ﬂood pulse on maintaining the persistence of p. lineatus. when the ﬂood pulse was considered ‘normal’, colonisation rate was com- pletely at random and close to saturation. when inundation fails to happen (or it has short duration), colonisation becomes impossible and an expressive decrease on the fraction of occupied lagoons is observed. under this condition, p. lineatus popula- tion is condemned to extinction, as showed by our drought-dependent model. floods with a short duration can affect negatively lineatus reproduction success and recruitment, p. ultimately conducting to a total failure, leading to decreased number of occupied lagoons. we noted a high probability of extinction during the second period, and during the 2 years with no ﬂoods, fraction of occupied lagoons by p. lineatus was close to zero, again, demonstrated by our drought-depend- ent model. 196 other factors may be related to the persistence of the species. for example, extinction rate should be higher in small populations than large ones (shaffer 1981; lande 1993), then, the occurrence of a species is more likely to happen in large habitats. in addition, colonisation should be greater in well-connected habitats when compared with isolated ones. these factors may also inﬂuence the persistence of p. lineatus, but it was clear that the abundance of the species was lower in the second period. area of the lagoons and connection were not considered in this study. the shiisorapuchi river for ﬁsh in creeks, koizumi & maekawa (2004) demonstrated that habitat size, type and degree of isolation inﬂuenced the occurrence of dolly varden in tributaries of (upper and middle stretches). other studies have demonstrated the effects of these factors on the persistence of ﬁsh species in creeks. in addition, anthropogenic actions, especially those related to agriculture, construction of roads and dams have inﬂuence on persistence of ﬁsh species in creeks (koizumi & maekawa 2004). predictions cited above are valid for rivers in a continuum, where distance and size of habitats have important consequences for colonisation and extinc- tion. in ﬂoodplains, the distance between the lagoon and the main river may be considered the essential aspect, because when ﬂoods are of low intensity and duration, lagoons may not be reached, decreasing the persistence of a species. according to our drought- dependent model, absence of long ﬂoods is the key factor for the persistence of p. lineatus in the upper parana´ river ﬂoodplain. other factors, not mentioned here, may also contribute to increase local extinctions of p. lineatus in isolated lagoons, such as abiotic factors, predation and competition (okada et al. 2003; agostinho et al. 2004; thomaz et al. 2004; piana et al. 2006). how- ever, for them to inﬂuence persistence, a species must ﬁrst reach the lagoons, what is only possible when ﬂoods occur, which was more conspicuous in the ﬁrst period. therefore, the artiﬁcial control of the hydro- logical cycle prompted by dams seems to be more serious than considered so far, especially when ﬂoodplains are located at the end of a cascade of reservoirs, as the case of the upper parana´ river. acknowledgements we thank nupe´lia/uem and conselho nacional de desen- volvimento cientı´ﬁco e tecnolo´ gico (cnpq), padct/ciamb and peld (site 6 of the brazilian long term ecological research) and unesco for ﬁnancial support and grant for eag was provided by cnpq. we are also grateful to fernando m. pelicice, pita´goras a. piana and anonymous referees for providing valuable suggestions. references agostinho, a.a. & zalewski, m. 1995. the dependence of ﬁsh community structure and dynamics on ﬂoodplain and riparian ecotone zone in parana´ river, brazil. hydrobiologia 303: 141–148. agostinho, a.a., vazzoler, a.e.a. de m., gomes, l.c. & okada, e.k. 1993. estratiﬁcacio´ n espacial y comportamiento de prochilodus scrofa en distintas fase del ciclo de vida, en la planı´cie de inundacio´n del alto rio parana´ y embalse de itaipu, parana´, brasil. revue d’hydrobiologie tropicale 26: 79–90. agostinho, a.a., ju´ lio, h.f. jr, gomes, l.c., bini, l.m. & agostinho, c.s. 1997. composic¸a˜o, abundaˆncia e distribuic¸a˜o espac¸o-temporal da ictiofauna. in: vazzoler, a.e.a. de m., agostinho, a.a. & hahn, h.s., eds. a planı´cie de inundac¸a˜o do alto rio parana´. maringa´: eduem, pp. 179–208. agostinho, a.a., gomes, l.c., suzuki, h.i. & ju´ lio, h.f. jr 2003. migratory ﬁshes of the upper parana´ river basin, brazil. in: carolsfeld, j., harvey, b., ross, c. & baer, a., eds. migratory ﬁshes of south america: biology, ﬁsheries and conservation status. victoria: world fisheries trust, pp. 19–99. agostinho, a.a., gomes, l.c., verı´ssimo, s. & okada, e.k. 2004. flood regime, dam regulation and ﬁsh in the upper parana´ river: effects on assemblage attributes, reproduction and recruitment. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 14: 11–19. agostinho, a.a., thomaz, s.m. & gomes, l.c. 2005. conservation of the biodiversity of brazil’s inland waters. conservation biology 19: 1–7. agostinho, a.a., gomes, l.c. & pelicice, f.m. 2007. ecologia e manejo de recursos pesqueiros em reservato´rios do brasil. maringa´: eduem: 501pp. cunico, a.m., da grac¸a, w.j., verı´ssimo, s. & bini, l.m. 2002. inﬂueˆncia do nı´vel hidrolo´ gico sobre a assemble´ia de peixes em lagoa sazonalmente isolada da planı´cie de inundac¸a˜o do alto rio parana´. acta scientiarum 24: 383–389. ferreti, m.c., gomes, l.c., agostinho, a.a. & luiz, e.a. 1998. diversidade, densidade e biomassa instantaˆnea em lagoas e ambientes litoraˆneos da planı´cie de inundac¸a˜o do alto rio parana´. anais do viii semina´rio regional de ecologia 8: 1539–1550. gomes, l.c. & agostinho, a.a. 1997. inﬂuence of the ﬂooding regime on the nutritional state and juvenile recruitment of the curimba, prochilodus scrofa, steindachner, in upper parana river, brazil. fisheries management and ecology 4: 263– 274. gotelli, n.j. 1991. metapopulations models: the rescue effect, the propagule rain, and the core-satellite hypothesis. ameri- can naturalist 138: 768–776. gotelli, n.j. 2001. a primer of ecology. sunderland, ma: sinauer associates inc. 206 pp. hanski, i. 1991. single-species metapopulation dynamics: concepts, models and observations. biological journal of the linnaean society 42: 17–38. hanski, i. 1999. metapopulation ecology. london: oxford university press. 313 pp. fish populations in the upper parana´ river hanski, i. & gilpin, m.e. 1996. metapopulation biology: ecology, genetics, and evolution. san diego, ca: academic press. 512 pp. harrison, s. & taylor, a.d. 1996. empirical evidence for metapopulation dynamics. in: hanski, i. & gilpin, m.e., eds. metapopulation biology. san diego: academic press, pp. 27– 42. hixon, m.a., pacala, s.w. & sandin, s.a. 2002. population regulation: historical context and contemporary challenges of open vs. closed systems. ecology 83: 1490–1508. junk, w.j., bayley, p.b. & sparks, r.e. 1989. the ﬂood pulse concept in river–ﬂoodplain systems. in: dodge, d.p., ed. proceedings of the international large river symposium. ottawa: canadian special publishers fisheries and aquatic sciences. pp. 110–127. karieva, p. 1990. population dynamics in spatially complex environments: theory and data. philosophical transactions of the royal society of london, series b 330: 175–190. koizumi, i. & maekawa, k. 2004. metapopulation structure of stream-dwelling dolly varden charr inferred from patterns of occurrence in the sorachi river basin, hokkaido, japan. freshwater biology 49: 973–981. lande, r. 1993. risks of population extinction from demogra- phic and environmental stochasticity and random catastro- phes. american naturalist 142: 911–927. levin, s.a., grenfell, b., hastings, a. & perelson, a.s. 1997. mathematical and computational challenges in population biology and ecosystems science. science 275: 334–343. levins, r. 1969. some demographic and genetic consequences of environmental heterogeneity for biological control. bul- letin of the entomological society of america 15: 237–240. neiff, j.j. 1990. ideas para la interpretacion ecologica del parana. intercieˆncia 15: 424–441. okada, e.k., agostinho, a.a., petrere, m. jr & penczak, t. 2003. factors affecting ﬁsh diversity and abundance in drying ponds and lagoons in the upper parana´ river basin, brazil. ecohydrology & hydrobiology 3: 97–110. piana, p.a., gomes, l.c. & agostinho, a.a. 2006. comparison of predator–prey interaction models for ﬁsh assemblages from the neotropical region. ecological modelling 192: 259– 270. shaffer, m.l. 1981. minimum population sizes for species conservation. bioscience 31: 131–134. sverlij, s.b.a., espinach, a. & orti, g. 1993. sinopsis de los datos biolo´gicos y pesqueros del sa´balo prochilodus lineatus (valenciennes, 1847). roma, fao: fao sinopsis sobre la pesca. thomaz, s.m., pagioro, t.a., bini, l.m., roberto, m. do c. & the upper rocha, r.r. de a. 2004. limnology of parana´ floodplain habitats: patterns of spatio-temporal variations and inﬂuence of the water levels. in: agostinho, a.a., rodrigues, l., gomes, l.c., thomaz, s.m. & miranda, l.e., eds. structure and functioning of the parana´ river and its ﬂoodplain: lter – site 6 – (peld – site 6). maringa´: eduem, pp. 37–42. 197  