ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 42–51 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish colonisation tactics of three temperate catadromous species, eel anguilla anguilla, mullet liza ramada and ﬂounder plathychtys ﬂesus, revealed by bayesian multielemental otolith microchemistry approach daverat f, martin j, fablet r, pe´cheyran c. colonisation tactics of three temperate catadromous species, eel anguilla anguilla, mullet liza ramada and ﬂounder plathychtys ﬂesus, revealed by bayesian multielemental otolith microchemistry approach. ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 42–51. ó 2010 john wiley & sons a ⁄ s abstract – the colonisation of gironde (sw france) river catchment by juvenile, eel, anguilla anguilla, ﬂounder platychtys ﬂesus and thinlipp mullet liza ramada was investigated comparatively using sr:ca and ba:ca composition of otolith. the relation between sr, ba and habitat was investigated based on sr and ba water composition sampled each month along the estuary-river gradient. a total of 50 mullets, 30 eels and 47 ﬂounders were collected in the gironde river catchment. analysis was performed with a femtosecond la-icpms along a trajectory from the core to the edge. sr and ba water concentrations discriminated three habitats within the gironde system, the lower estuary, the upper estuary and the freshwater sites. a signal processing method based on gaussian hidden markov models was applied to the multielemental life-history data. the linear model used to allocate a gironde habitat to coupled sr, ca values was parameterised with seasonal patterns and magnitude of sr and ba water values in the different habitats. the results showed that the three species used three different habitats and they had a large diversity of habitat use patterns with resident and nomadic tactics. resident tactics were less frequent than nomadic tactics that suggested individual ﬁsh used two or more habitats. mullet used a wider range of habitats in the lower part of the estuary than eel and ﬂounder and switched habitats more frequently. flounders tended to colonise initially freshwater, and then estuarine habitats later in life while mullets used the entire range of available catchment habitats throughout their life. f. daverat1, j. martin1, r. fablet2, c. pe´cheyran3 1cemagref, ur epbx, cestas cedex, france, 2cnrs fre 3167 labsticc cs 83818 techno- poˆle brest-iroise, france, 3universite´ de pau et des pays de l’adour, umr 5254 iprem-lcabie, he´lioparc pau pyre´ne´es, pau cedex, france key words: diadromous strategy; individual life histories; otolith microchemistry; bayesian labelling; hidden markov models; anguilla anguilla; platychtys ﬂesus; liza ramada f. daverat, cemagref, ur epbx, 50, av. de verdun 33612 cestas cedex, france; e-mail: francoise.daverat@cemagref.fr accepted for publication september 3, 2010 the convergence of life strategies among eel anguilla anguilla, mullet liza ramada and ﬂounder plathychtys ﬂesus, the three european catadromous species, consists of spawning at sea and spending growth periods in inland waters (estuaries, rivers or coastal waters) (mcdowall 1997). the larvae of the three species hatched at sea have a high ability for dispersal, explaining the large distribution range of the three species. the ﬂounder (berrebi et al. 1985) and the eel (tesch 2003) are distributed from scandinavia to southern portugal and in the mediterranean, and the mullet has a wide distribution in warm waters. diadromous ﬁsh species display a great variability in their life-history traits, among them are the habitat use pattern or migratory trajectory. partial migration, a common strategy of diadromous ﬁsh populations, consists in alternative tactics of habitat use of groups of ﬁsh often described in salmonids (jonsson & 42 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00454.x jonsson 1993). the groups of ﬁsh displaying alterna- tive tactics may be referred to as contingents (secor 1999). the underlying evolutionary mechanism of partial migration is still unclear with species exhibiting strategies with alternative tactics based on a genetic polymorphs or species exhibiting alternative tactics as alternative phenotypes (gross 1996). the european eel alternative tactics of habitat use during the growth phase have been studied (tsukam- oto et al. 1998; tzeng et al. 2000; tsukamoto & arai 2001; arai et al. 2003, 2004; limburg et al. 2003; daverat & elie 2004; daverat et al. 2004, 2006). the main conclusions of this research were as follows: (i) habitat use patterns were plastic; (ii) eel are either resident (in a lagoon, estuary, lake or river) or nomads (they shift habitat once or several times during their growth phase); (iii) the proportion of habitat use pattern type varies along a latitude gradient. whether mullet and ﬂounder also display alternative tactics of habitat use and share the same strategy as eel remains unknown. the inﬂuence of major life traits such as the investment of energy spent for dispersal, foraging and reproduction could potentially inﬂuence the tactics of habitat use of the three species. reproductive strategies differ between mullet and ﬂounder, both iteroparous species with short spawning migration to the coastal spawning grounds (masson 1987), and eel a semelparous ﬁsh (tesch 2003), undertaking a transatlantic spawning migration to the sargasso sea. compared to eel, the diversity of habitat use patterns of mullet and ﬂounder was less docu- mented. all data available for mullet and ﬂounder were based on the qualitative observations of ﬁsh utilising habitat. observation of mullet in estuaries including the freshwater upper reaches was noted (berrebi et al. 1985; almeida et al. 1993; almeida 1996; laffaille et al. 2002; marchand et al. 2003). occurrence of mullets was also reported in dam bypass traps as far as vichy along the allier river, 653 km from the sea, (logrami http://www.logrami. fr), attesting the effective colonisation of rivers. according to experiment, the osmoregulation system of liza ramada allowed the species to spend several months in freshwater without cell damage (lasserre & gallis 1975). although the diadromous strategy of the ﬂounder was often omitted, observations in the ﬁeld conﬁrmed that ﬂounder used estuarine habitats (ber- rebi et al. 1985; masson 1987; jager 1999; marchand et al. 2003) as well as freshwater habitats for extended periods (radforth 1940; beaumont & mann 1984). otolith growth patterns and chemical composition potentially provide the detailed individual chronolo- gies of habitat use that are of great value to ecological studies (elsdon & gillanders 2003; elsdon et al. 2008). investigation based on measurements of stron- tium ⁄ calcium (sr:ca) ratios and to a lesser extent colonisation tactics of juvenile catadromous species barium ⁄ calcium (ba:ca) across microstructural fea- tures in eel otoliths has been broadly used to address the alternative habitat use tactics of diadromous ﬁsh across different saline water masses (tabouret et al. 2010; yoh et al. 2000; chang et al. 2004a; elsdon & gillanders 2005). reconstruction of habitat use patterns and of histories of movement with a bayesian approach has been proved a very powerful tool to classify the eel tactics of a french river basin without any a priori judgement on the expected patterns (fablet et al. 2007). the objectives of this work were to comparatively investigate the alternative individual habitat use pat- terns of eel, mullet and ﬂounder juveniles in the gironde river catchment using sr and ba as tracers. to achieve this, individual habitat use patterns were automatically reconstructed, characterised and cate- gorised from a bayesian joint analysis of sr:ca and ba:ca otolith transects. material and methods study site (fig. 1). the bottom of the brackish part of the gironde tidal estuary, with an approximate surface area of 625 km2 at high tide, is 76 km long. it varies in width from two to 11 km at its widest part the brackish estuary is mainly a mixture of sand and mud with the sandiest part in the lower sectors and the muddiest part in the upper sectors (castaing 1981, sottolichio 1999). in the gironde estuary, the salinity gradient varies upstream between 33 and 0 and changes with tide and season (castaing 1981, sottolichio 1999). the limit of the brackish estuary is deﬁned with the 0 salinity front. the freshwater tidal gironde estuary encompasses the lower part of the garonne and the dordogne rivers. the two rivers join at the location bec d’ambe`s, the upper end of the brackish estuary. fish a total of 45 ﬂounders (collected in january 2005), 50 mullets (may 2007) and 30 eels (2002) were collected by research trawl in the brackish estuary, and four ﬂounders were sampled in september 2008 in a small dordogne river tributary, the dronne river. the ﬁsh were euthanised in clove oil. total length (mm) and weight (0.01 g) were recorded. sex was determined according to the macroscopic examination of the gonad. water chemistry evaluation of [ba] and [sr] previous analysis validated the presence of a sr gradient throughout the year in the gironde (daverat 43 daverat et al. fig. 1. map of the gironde river system showing the four water sampling sites c1 (pauillac upper estuary), c2 (bordeaux, tidal freshwater), c3 (cadaujac, tidal freshwater), c4 (libourne, tidal freshwater), the estuary zones and the dronne river. et al. 2005) system and the incorporation of sr in eel otolith in proportion with sr water. marine water concentration of ba and sr from the bay of biscay (tabouret et al. 2010) and lower gironde estuary (daverat et al. 2005) was used as reference marine and lower estuarine values. in the adour river basin, beyond a salinity of 20, both sr ⁄ ca and ba ⁄ ca ratios did not seem to vary with salinity (tabouret et al. 2010); consequently, the four sampling sites (c1, c2, c3, c4) along the catchment gradient were located in the upper estuary zone with an average salinity of ﬁve and in the freshwater tidal zone (fig. 1). the part of the tidal cycle corresponding to the sampling time was recorded. water samples were ﬁltered immediately after sampling (approximately 1 m from the riverbank, 0.2 m depth) through 0.2 -lm nucleoporeò polycar- bonate ﬁlters. filtrates were collected in acid-washed 60- ml pp bottles, acidiﬁed (hno3 ultrex 0.1%) and stored in the dark at 4 °c until analysis. dissolved concentrations were measured using icp-ms (x7, thermo) with external calibration. the analytical methods employed were continuously quality checked 44 by analysis of certiﬁed international reference waters (slrs-4 and slrs-5). accuracy was within 5% of the certiﬁed values and precision generally better than 5% (relative standard deviation) for concentrations )1; 10 times higher than detection limits (sr: 25 ngæl )1). the four sampling sites (fig. 1) were ba: 7 ngæl equipped with autonomous ﬁxed platforms designed for water quality monitoring, recording salinity, and turbidity and water temperature every few minutes (magest, marel gironde estuaire consortium; auto- matic water quality observation network. http:// www.magest.u-bordeaux1.fr/public/). a small-scale validation in aquaria was undertaken to assess mullet, eel and ﬂounder species-speciﬁc water ⁄ otolith ratio (unpublished data). this experi- ment conﬁrmed that eel, mullet and ﬂounder incorpo- rated sr and ba in their otolith in proportion with water. sagittal otoliths were extracted, rinsed three times with milliq water, dried and stored until they were embedded in epoxy resin. otoliths were ground in the sagittal plane for eel and ﬂounder, in the frontal plane for mullet to expose the core, polished using 1 micron diamond paste and stored in clean plastic sealable vials awaiting analysis. mullet and ﬂounder otoliths were prepared with a tradeoff because despite the choice of the best possible cutting plane, the core and the edge were not always in the same plane. la-icpms the ﬂounder, mullet and eel otoliths from the gironde river basin were sampled, across a transect perpendic- ular to the growth marks from the core to the edge. for the eel and the ﬂounder, structural marks of the end of the larval phase, or postmetamorphosis, i. e. the ‘‘glass eel mark’’ for the eel and the accessory primordium (ap) for the ﬂounder, determined the beginning of the sr:ca and ba:ca transects. accessory primordia (ap) were also observed in the core of mullet otoliths, but to our knowledge, related to a speciﬁc ontogenetic event. it was not the concentration of elements (sr, ba, ca) in the otolith sample was determined using a icpms – elan drc ii (perkin elmer) coupled with a high repetition rate infra red femtosecond laser alfamet (alfamet, novalase sa – amplitude systemes, france), with a pulse rate of 3 khz, a power of 115 mw and ablation spot size of 20 lm. in addition, a low volume ablation cell (3.7 cm3) was used to minimise signal peak broadening and enhanced the signal-to-noise ratio. quantiﬁcation of trace elements in otoliths was achieved by external calibration using a series of 13 coprecipitated carbonate pellets (barats et al. 2007) )1. matrix matching ranging from 0.1 to 500 lgæg calibration was preferred over conventional nist glass sample to ensure the best accuracy. an otolith certiﬁed reference material (nies 22) was also pelletised and used in the calibration curve. the calibration curve was systematically repeated every 12 samples using three enriched pellets and the crm nies 22 to correct for low-frequency drift resulting from changes in room temperature, plasma and electronics. statistics (sr:ca, ba:ca) individual sr, ba life-history transects the analysis of sr, ba transects was based on the method developed in fablet et al. 2007, expanding the method from a monoelemental transect (sr:ca) to a multielemental (sr:ca, ba:ca) transect. the program was coded within the matlabò software. for each individual life-history transect, a calibration over time was performed to obtain (sr:ca, ba:ca) time series. for each species, annual ring positions along the transect axis were used as time references to transform (sr:ca, ba:ca) series acquired with respect to the distance to the core for the mullet, or the elver mark for eels, or the accessory primordium for the ﬂounder, to time series using a linear interpo- lation. the time series were interpolated at a monthly precision (that is to say a time sampling rate of 12 samplings in between two annual rings). we will further refer to this time axis as the age axis, because it refers to the time spent from birth for mullet, or estuary entrance for eel or metamorphosis for ﬂounder. following fablet et al. 2007, coupled sr:ca, ba:ca measures can be regarded as a proxy of the habitat type for eels, ﬂounders and mullets of the gironde river basin. three habitat categories were considered according to saline compartment: river, lower estuary and upper estuary. we further modelled the distribu- tion of (sr:ca, ba:ca) signatures for each habitat as a gaussian distribution parameterised by a linear model. for an optimal discrimination of habitats, the linear model was parameterised with the monthly sr and ba water concentrations along the year in the three habitats. the range of sr:ca and ba:ca otolith values from each species measured in the validation part was used to allocate an habitat type (river, upper estuary or lower estuary) to a gaussian mode. the analysis of individual patterns of habitat use, from the series of (sr:ca, ba:ca) measures, was formally stated as a bayesian labelling issue, accord- ing to the maximum a posteriori (map) criterion. the latter issue resorted to retrieving the temporal habitat sequence (xt) corresponding to the maximum posterior likelihood given the observed series of (sr:ca, ba:ca) measures (yt), where, for each time t, xt is a label: r (river), e (estuary) or m (marine area). to account for realistic temporal dynamics of movement among colonisation tactics of juvenile catadromous species habitats, ﬁrst-order gaussian hidden markov models (hmm) (rabiner 1989) were used. the nonsupervised classiﬁcation of the habitat use patterns for each species was then performed using a method issued from speech analysis (rabiner 1989). the habitat use patterns were deﬁned as the sequence of the successive habitats visited by the ﬁsh: for instance, the movement pattern issued from habitat sequence rrrreeeerrrrr was rer. given the whole otolith set, the automated and unsupervised classiﬁcation of individual habitat use patterns could be determined, as well as the relative frequencies of these categories of habitat use patterns. in contrast to an expert-driven analysis, the nonsupervised categor- isation does not exploit any prior knowledge (typically some expert knowledge) on the expected categories to be deﬁned. the categorisation is only issued from data characteristics and statistics. as the habitat sequences were calibrated over time, a variety of measures could also be deﬁned to characterise individual life traits such the distribution of the age at entrance into freshwater habitat and time spent in freshwater before moving to another habitat. results water chemistry that sampling sites the sr values of the upper estuary site c1 ranged from )1 and were signiﬁcantly higher 105.1 to 1794.76 lgæl (p < 0.05) than the sr values of the freshwater sites (c2, c3 and c4) ranged from 59.47 to )1. ba values were not different between 266.99 lgæl the and ranged from 3.39 to )1. however, water concentration of sr 35.73 lgæl and ba in the sites c1, c2, c3 and c4 showed a temporal variability along the year, allowing the discrimination of the upper estuary site from the freshwater sites. sr values (fig. 2) were always higher in the upper estuary site (c1) than in c2, c3 and c4 sites except in june, but then ba values at the same date (fig. 2) discriminated c1 from the three other sites. ba values in the water (fig. 2) exhibited an inverted seasonal pattern between the upper estuary site c1 and the freshwater sites c2, c3 and c4. ba values did not overlap between c1 and the freshwater c2, c3 and c4 sites except in february and march. at any time of the year, coupled values of sr and ba concentration discriminated the estuarine site c1 from the freshwater sites, while c1 salinity was low (fig. 2). the sr and ba concentration values of water masses with a salinity exceeding 20 in the lower gironde estuary (daverat et al. 2005) or the adour estuary plume (tabouret et al. 2010) were very stable )1 for and ranged, respectively, from 6520 to 9160 lgæl )1for ba. thus, the different sr and from 0.8 to 16 lgæl 45 daverat et al. (a) 1 – l · g µ r s (c) y t i n i l a s 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 5 0 5 1 0 1 5 0 c3 c2 c4 c1 (b) 1 – l · g µ a b 0 5 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 1 0 2 4 6 8 month 10 12 2 4 6 8 month 10 12 c3 c2 c4 c1 2 4 6 8 month 10 12 fig. 2. (a) sr water concentration lgæl location (libourne, freshwater); (b) ba water concentration lgæl )1 at c1 location (pauillac upper estuary), c2 (bordeaux, freshwater), c3 (cadaujac, freshwater) and c4 )1 at c1, c2, c3, c4; (c) salinity at c1, c2, c3, c4. compartment of the gironde, i. e. the lower estuary, the upper estuary and the connected freshwater sites, could be discriminated based on the sr and ⁄ or ba concentrations. wild ﬁsh fish characteristics a total of 30 eels, 29 mullets and 46 ﬂounders were used in the habitat use patterns analysis. mean length of eel sample was 497 mm (range 282–715), with a mean age of 8 years; mean length of mullet sample was 381 mm (range 260–510), with a mean age of 8.3 years. the ﬂounder sample had a mean length of 252 mm (range 47–330) and a mean age of 3.5 years. habitat use patterns allocation of habitat to gaussian modes the ﬁt of the gaussian mixture model on the sr:ca, ba:ca values’ distribution for each species was obtained with three modes representing three habitat types, as shown for eel in fig. 3. based on the fact that the water showed a gradient of sr:ca and ba:ca values in the gironde estuary and that the three species incorporated sr:ca and ba:ca in their otoliths in proportion with water, type was allocated to the gaussian mode ﬁtted on the lowest sr:ca values. then, the lower estuary habitat type was allocated to the gaussian mode ﬁtted on the highest the river habitat 46 0.015 0.01 0.005 0 0 0.025 0.02 0.015 0.01 0.005 0 0 0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.01 sr:ca ratio in eel otoliths 0.2 0.4 0.6 ba:ca ratio in eel otoliths 0.8 1 × 10–5 fig. 3. distribution of the sr:ca (upper panel) and ba:ca (lower panel) otolith values from all the eel samples, sharp dashed line; distribution of the three modes of the ﬁtted linear gaussian model corresponding to three different probability distributions, i.e. three habitats for the eel sample, black bold dashed line representing the freshwater habitat, grey bold solid line representing the upper estuarine habitat, black bold solid line representing the lower estuarine habitat. sr:ca values for each species, and the upper estuary habitat type was allocated to the gaussian mode ﬁtted on the intermediate values. habitat allocation and multielemental approach for the eel, as shown in fig. 4, using solely sr, only two gaussian modes (i.e. habitats) could efﬁciently ﬁt on the sr:ca distribution, whereas the addition of ba:ca (fig. 3) allowed the discrimination of three habitats. moving from a monoelemental to a 0.015 0.01 0.005 0 0 0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.01 sr:ca ratio fig. 4. distribution of the sr:ca otolith values from all the eel samples, and the three modes of the ﬁtted gaussian model for the eel sample corresponding to three different probability distribu- tions, i.e. three habitats for the eel sample, black bold dashed line representing the freshwater habitat, grey bold solid line represent- ing the upper estuarine habitat, black bold solid line representing the lower estuarine habitat. multielemental approach improved the geographical discrimination of water masses along the gironde estuary gradient. flounder each individual habitat use pattern was retrieved (example in fig. 5) and revealed a great diversity of patterns. the classiﬁcation of habitat use patterns of ﬂounders at the scale of the sample (fig. 6) showed that of 46 individuals, 23 alternative patterns could be found. resident habitat use patterns were only found for seven individual ﬂounders, with four ﬁsh resident of the marine estuary and three ﬂounders resident of a freshwater habitat (fig. 6). twenty-two habitat use patterns, corresponding to 43 ﬁshes, included the use of freshwater habitat (fig. 6). most ﬂounders had moved between the three habitats several times, with up to nine habitat shifts during their lifetime. most habitat use patterns had included freshwater habitat residence only once, with only four individuals having used freshwater habitat twice. eel the classiﬁcation of the habitat use patterns of the 30 individuals present in the sample resulted in 15 × 10–3 5 a c / r s 0 0 2 × 10–4 a c a b / s t a t i b a h 1 0 3 2 1 0 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 0.5 0.5 1 1 1.5 1.5 age (years) 2 2 2.5 2.5 3 3 colonisation tactics of juvenile catadromous species ) % ( y c n e u q e r f 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 n > 5 ereme re e reme ere ererere ererem erememe reme me r m me mere meme me re m er r m r r fig. 6. frequencies of ﬂounder habitat use patterns estimated from the model. each habitat sequence is represented by the successive types of habitats visited by the ﬁsh, i.e. a habitat sequence eeeerrree sequence would be represented by the sequence ere; the relative frequencies (%) of habitat use patterns present in the processed data are reported in decreasing order. different habitat use patterns (fig. 7). among them, only one individual eel remained resident in the same habitat, the lower estuary (marine residency). most eels in the sample changed habitat at least three times, with a maximum of nine habitat shifts (fig. 7). seven habitat use patterns included the use of freshwater. frequent habitat use pattern was mullet fifteen alternative habitat use patterns were found among the 30 mullets involved in the analysis (fig. 8). the most the residence in the upper estuary compartment. five habitat use patterns included the use of the freshwater habitat (fig. 8). most habitat use patterns included movements between the lower and the upper estuary compartments. a maximum number of 12 habitat shifts were found in the retrieved patterns. time spent in the freshwater part of the system the amount of time spent in freshwater and the age at habitat shift from the freshwater habitat were retrieved from the ﬂounder individual habitat use patterns 0.15 0.1 0.05 ) % ( y c n e u q e r f 0 n > 5 emememe ereme eme reme eremememe re rere ememe e me ememememe ememememem remememe emem rem fig. 5. example of estimated habitat use pattern, for a ﬂounder, with the sr:ca values (upper graph) sequence, the ba:ca sequence (middle graph) and the estimated habitat use sequence (lower graph) 1 = freshwater habitat r, 2 = upper estuary e, 3 = lower estuary m, here the habitat use pattern is expressed as rem. fig. 7. frequencies of eel habitat use patterns retrieved from the model. each habitat sequence is represented by the successive types of habitats visited by the ﬁsh, i.e. a habitat sequence eeeerrree sequence would be represented by the sequence ere; the relative frequencies (%) of habitat use patterns present in the processed data are reported in decreasing order. 47 daverat et al. ) % ( y c n e u q e r f 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 e eme em ememe me emem n > 5 mememe mememem me mememem mememe meme meme mem r emem r em eremer rem r m r em r fig. 8. frequencies of mullet habitat use patterns retrieved from the model. each habitat sequence is represented by the successive types of habitats visited by the ﬁsh, i.e. a habitat sequence eeeerrree sequence would be represented by the sequence ere; the relative frequencies (%) of habitat use patterns present in the processed data are reported in decreasing order. fig. 9. distribution of age (years) at arrival in freshwater habitat coming from upper estuary (e) for ﬂounders. fig. 10. distribution of duration (years) of the stay in freshwater habitat before switching to upper estuary (e) for ﬂounders. (fig. 9). the analysis revealed that most ﬂounders entered initially the freshwater habitat before 1 year of age (fig. 9). flounders spent up to 2 years in fresh- water, but the majority only spent a few months in the freshwater habitat (fig. 10). the same trend was observed for eels that mostly initially entered the freshwater habitat before 1 year of age, and to a lesser extent before 2 years of age. most 48 eels spent a few months in the freshwater habitat at a time, and all the individuals examined spent <2 years in the freshwater habitat. the thin-lipped mullets that used freshwater habitats entered freshwater early in life. discussion use of sr:ca and ba:ca as tracers of ﬁsh movements tool the gaussian mixture model ﬁtted on the sr:ca and ba:ca couple measures in otolith of wild ﬁsh appeared to be powerful in discriminating ﬁne habitat compartments within the gironde estuarine system for eel, mullet and ﬂounder. the interpretation of the three gaussian modes in terms of habitat use was based on the sr and ba water concentration values. compared to the description of habitat obtained by fablet et al. 2007, the spatial resolution was improved using ba and sr rather than using sr alone for eel, with a better discrimination of the tidal freshwater estuary from the tributaries. migration in freshwater in the present study, some mullet, ﬂounder and eel migrated directly to freshwater habitats at an early stage. to insure that our study was restricted to the period of the life history corresponding to the juvenile growth phase, we relied on otolith structure, for eel and ﬂounder. this was different for mullet. to our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst time accessory primordium (ap) was observed in the otolith of liza ramada, but we had no clue to interpret it. ap observed in the otolith structure of mugil cephalus (hsu et al. 2009) was deposited very soon after estuarine arrival. ap in mugil cephalus otolith was related to a change in behaviour from pelagic to benthic habits (hsu et al. 2009). despite several trials to ﬁnd the optimal cutting plane, mullet otolith growth axis was slightly twisted in old ﬁsh (to a lesser extent for ﬂounder) so that the early-stage habitat use had a lower time resolution than the older stages. the lower resolution of sr:ca and ba:ca values and the effect of ontogenetic events (end of metamorphosis for the ﬂounder and change of behaviour) may confuse the interpretation of ﬁsh movements. using sr:ca tracer alone, a pattern of decreasing sr:ca in the otolith was associated with metamorphosis rather than with the entrance in freshwater for dover sole solea solea (de pontual et al. 2003). ba was not found to vary with ontoge- netic events (elsdon & gillanders 2005; arai & hirata 2006); consequently, the use of ba mitigated this adverse effect and we obtained a correct interpretation of the chemical composition in terms of habitat (tabouret et al. 2010). the migration at an early stage of the ﬂounder to freshwater was in accordance with the collection of very young larvae reported in the canche upper estuary (selleslagh & amara 2008). freshwater was found to trigger the metamorphosis of ﬂounder (hutchinson & hawkins 2004). the mean age of ﬂounders ﬁrst entered in freshwater was older than the estimated age of 43 days at metamorphosis, derived from 30 young ﬂounder otoliths sampled in the same estuary (comm. pers.). the ability for the eel (creutzberg 1958; bolliet et al. 2007), the ﬂounder (jager 1999) and the mullet (pers. comm.) to use selective tidal transport, i.e. an effective use of ebb tides to migrate upstream, was consistent with a rapid migration of the juveniles to freshwater habitats found in the present study. the use of markov model reinforced the validity of the presence of the ﬁsh in the allocated habitat because the most probable habitat sequence was retrieved in consideration with the life habitat use pattern sample set as a whole and also taking into account the habitat allocated before and afterwards time t for each individual pattern. the use of sr and ba water composition chronicles as additional parameters in the linear model were also a means to improve the discrimination of geographical habitats within the system studied. moreover, the strength of the unsupervised categorisation of habitat use pattern that retrieved the diversity of habitat explored by mullet, eel and ﬂounder resided in the absence of a priori on the expected habitat use patterns. level of catadromy and diversity of tactics the present work revealed that for the three species, a large diversity of habitat use patterns could be observed. entering freshwater at an early age, when selected at the individual level, seems to be a tactic shared by the three species, although much less frequent for mullet. this result was in accordance with the catadromous classiﬁcation of three species. use of freshwater habitat at the beginning of the growth phase and shifting to the marine estuary was a common tactic observed for the three temperate species of eels (daverat et al. 2006). in anguilla anguilla, the gut was found to develop for osmoreg- ulation in freshwater whatever the ambient salinity (ciccotti et al. 1993), indicating ontogenetic program- ming for osmoregulation in freshwater. similarly, a large majority of just metamorphosed ﬂounder were found to choose freshwater rather than brackish water in aquarium experiments (bos & thiel 2006). the osmoregulation system of liza ramada was also adapted to freshwater (lasserre & gallis 1975). the heritance of ancestral behaviour (tsukamoto & aoy- colonisation tactics of juvenile catadromous species ama 1998) and the avoidance of predators present in denser habitats such as estuaries (edeline 2007) were the major hypotheses used to explain the choice of freshwater habitat of eels species at an early age. freshwater habitat may provide more shelters for benthic behaviour ﬁshes such as ﬂounder and eel (jonsson & jonsson 1993). although for eel and ﬂounder, living in brackish habitats resulted in faster growth than growing in freshwater (gutt 1985). of the three species, ﬂounder carried, comparatively to eel and mullet, less alternative habitat diversity. all ﬂounders except four experienced freshwater habitat at the beginning of their growth phase. in the case of the gironde, ﬂounder exhibited an obligate catadromous strategy. whether other platichtys ﬂesus populations have an obligate early growth phase in freshwater still unknown. a related species, platichtys is bicoloratus, used alternative habitat tactics during the juvenile growth phase (yoh et al. 2000), but it was restricted to brackish estuarine and coastal habitats. compared to eel and ﬂounder, mullet sample displayed the highest proportion of resident ﬁsh and was more restricted to the tidal estuary. thin-lipped mullet was found to feed more intensively in the upper estuary than in the lower estuary in two portuguese sites (almeida 2003). a telemetry study showed a greater use of the upper estuary compared to the lower estuary by liza ramada (almeida 1996) and demon- strated that thin-lipped mullet performed great ampli- tudes movements within a tide cycle. in the present work, mullets displayed habitat use patterns with up to 10 habitats shifts within their lifetime, evidence for an ability to move quickly between habitats. another mullet species, mugil cephalus, displayed two alter- native tactics of habitat use in taiwan (chang et al. 2004b), including the use of freshwater habitat. mullets and ﬂounders sampled in the estuary for the present work were mature, on the way to the spawning grounds. as such, they were representative of the successful habitat use tactics. however, to investigate the whole range of alternative habitat use tactics, whether successful or not, more sampling effort should be given to add individual mullets, ﬂounders and eels collected in the freshwater sites of the gironde estuary. acknowledgement the ﬁnancial and technical support for the present work was obtained through the programs thalassotoque (feder and cper programs of region aquitaine, france), anr-07- vuln-03 eel-scope., and thalassotok seine aval. most ﬂounder otoliths were kindly provided by jean laroche and louis quiniou from brest university. we are grateful to j. f. bigot, r. le barh and b. ballion for their assistance on board of the esturial research vessel. me´lissa eon assisted in the la-icpms analysis of the otoliths. we are indebted to l. lanceleur and joerg 49 daverat et al. schaeffer from university of bordeaux i, epoc laboratory who performed the water analysis of sr and ba concentrations within the eelscope project framework. references almeida, p.r. 1996. estuarine movement patterns of adult thin- lipped grey mullet, liza ramada (risso) (pisces, mugilidae), observed by ultrasonic tracking. journal of experimental marine biology and ecology, 202: 137–150. almeida, p.r. 2003. feeding ecology of liza ramada (risso, 1810) (pisces, mugilidae) in a south-western estuary of portugal. estuarine, coastal and shelf science, 57: 313–323. almeida, p.r., moreira, f., costa, j.l., assis, c.a. & costa, m.j. 1993. the feeding strategies of liza ramada (risso, 1826) in fresh and brackish water in the river tagus, portugal. journal of fish biology, 42: 95–107. arai, t. & hirata, t. 2006. differences in the trace element deposition in otoliths between marine- and freshwater- resident japanese eels, anguilla japonica, as determined by laser ablation icpms. environmental biology of fishes, 75: 173–182. arai, t., kotake, a., ohji, m., miller, m.j., tsukamoto, k. & miyazaki, n. 2003. occurrence of sea eels of anguilla japonica along the sanriku coast of japan. ichthyological research, 50: 78–81. arai, t., kotake, a., lokman, p.m., miller, m.j. & tsukamoto, k. 2004. evidence of different habitat use by new zealand freshwater eels anguilla australis and a. dieffenbachii, as revealed by otolith microchemistry. marine ecology progress series, 266: 213–225. barats, a., pe´cheyran, c., amouroux, d., dubascoux, s., chauvaud, l. & donard, o. 2007. matrix-matched quanti- tative analysis of trace-elements in calcium carbonate shells by laser-ablation icp-ms: application to the determination of (pecten maximus). daily scale proﬁles in scallop shell analytical and bioanalytical chemistry, 387: 1131–1140. beaumont, w.r.c. & mann, r.h.k. 1984. the age, growth and diet of a freshwater population of the ﬂounder, platichthys ﬂesus (l), in southern england. journal of ﬁsh biology, 25: 607–616. berrebi, p., vianet, r., agne`se, j.-f., quignard, j.-p. & pasteur, n. 1985. variabilite´ ge´ne´tique et morphologique de quelques populations de ﬂets: platichthys ﬂesus sur les coˆtes me´dit- errane´ennes et atlantiques franc¸aises. biochemical systemat- ics and ecology, 13: 55–61. bolliet, v., lambert, p., rives, j. & bardonnet, a. 2007. rhythmic swimming activity in anguilla anguilla glass eels. synchronisation to water current reversal under laboratory conditions. journal of experimental marine biology and ecology, 344: 54–66. bos, a.r. & thiel, r. 2006. inﬂuence of salinity on the migration of postlarval and juvenile ﬂounder pleuronectes ﬂesus l. in a gradient experiment. journal of fish biology, 68: 1411–1420. castaing, p. 1981. le transfert a´ l’oce´an des suspensions estuariennes, cas de la gironde. in: oce´anographie. bordeaux i: talence, p. 530. chang, c.w., iizuka, y. & tzeng, w.n. 2004a. migratory environmental history of the grey mullet mugil cephalus as 50 revealed by otolith sr:ca ratios. marine ecology progress series, 269: 277–288. chang, c.w., lin, s.h., lizuka, y. & tzeng, w.n. 2004b. relationship between sr: ca ratios in otoliths of grey mullet mugil cephalus and ambient salinity: validation, mecha- nisms, and applications. zoological studies, 43: 74–85. ciccotti, e., macchi, e., rossi, a., cataldi, e. & cataudella, s. 1993. glass eel (anguilla anguilla) acclimation to fresh water and seawater morphological changes of the digestive tract. journal of applied ichthyology, 9: 74–81. creutzberg, f. 1958. use of tidal streams by migrating elvers (anguilla vulgaris turt.). nature, 181: 357–358. daverat, f., elie, p. & lahaye, m. 2004. microchemistry contribution to a ﬁrst approach to the diversity of life histories of eels from the lower part of the gironde garonne dordogne watershed. cybium, 28: 83–90. daverat, f., tomas, j., lahaye, m., palmer, m. & elie, p. 2005. tracking continental habitat shifts of eels using otolith sr ⁄ ca ratios: validation and application to the coastal, estuarine and riverine eels of the gironde-garonne-dordo- gne watershed. marine and freshwater research, 56: 619– 627. daverat, f., limburg, k.e., thibaut, i., shiao, j.c., dodson, j.j., caron, f., tzeng, w.-n., iizuka, y. & wickstro¨m, h. 2006. phenotypic plasticity of habitat use by three temperate eel species anguilla anguilla, a. japonica and a. rostrata. marine ecology progress series, 308: 231–241. de pontual, h., lagardere, f., amara, r., bohn, m. & ogor, a. 2003. inﬂuence of ontogenetic and environmental changes in the otolith microchemistry of sole (solea solea). journal of sea research, 50: 199–211. edeline, e. 2007. adaptive phenotypic plasticity of eel diadromy. marine ecology progress series, 341: 229–232. elsdon, t.s. & gillanders, b.m. 2003. reconstructing migra- tory patterns of ﬁsh based on environmental inﬂuences on otolith chemistry. reviews in fish biology and fisheries, 13: 219–235. elsdon, t.s. & gillanders, b.m. 2005. alternative life-history patterns of estuarine ﬁsh: barium in otoliths elucidates freshwater residency. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 62: 1143–1152. elsdon, t.s., wells, b.k., campana, s., gillanders, b.m., jones, c.m., limburg, k.e., secor, d.h., thorrold, s.r. & walther, b.d. 2008. otolith chemistry to describe movements and life-history parameters of ﬁshes: hypotheses, assump- tions, limitations and inferences. oceanography and marine biology: an annual review, 46: 297–330. fablet, r., daverat, f. & de pontual, h. 2007. unsupervised bayesian reconstruction of individual life histories from otolith signatures: case study of sr:ca transects of european eel (anguilla anguilla) otoliths. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 64: 152–165. gross, m.r. 1996. alternative reproductive strategies and tactics: diversity within sexes. trends in ecology & evolu- tion, 11: 92–98. gutt, j. 1985. the growth of juvenile ﬂounders platichthys ﬂesus l. at salinities of 0, 5, 15 and 35%. journal of applied ichthyology, 1: 17–26. hsu, c.-c., chang, c.w., iizuka, y. & tzeng, w.-n. 2009. a growth check deposited at estuarine arrival in otoliths of juvenile ﬂathead mullet (mugil cephalus l.). zoological studies (taipei), 48: 315–324. hutchinson, s. & hawkins, l.e. 2004. the relationship between temperature and the size and age of larvae and periods of metamorphic stages of pleuronectes ﬂesus. journal of fish biology, 65: 448–459. jager, z. 1999. selective tidal stream transport of ﬂounder larvae (platichthys ﬂesus l.) in the dollard (ems estuary). estuarine, coastal and shelf science, 49: 347–362. jonsson, b. & jonsson, n. 1993. partial migration : niche shift versus sexual maturation in ﬁshes. reviews in fish biology and fisheries, 3: 348–365. laffaille, p., feunteun, e., lefebvre, c., radureau, a., sagan, g. & lefeuvre, j.c. 2002. can thin-lipped mullet directly exploit the primary and detritic production of european macrotidal salt marshes? estuarine, coastal and shelf science, 54: 729–736. lasserre, p. & gallis, j.-l. 1975. osmoregulation and differ- ential penetration of two grey mullets, chelon labrosus (risso) and liza ramada (risso) in estuarine ﬁsh ponds. aquaculture, 5: 323–344. limburg, k.e., svedang, h., elfman, m. & kristiansson, p. 2003. do stocked freshwater eels migrate? evidence from the baltic suggests ‘‘yes’’. in: d. a., dixon., ed biology, management and protection of catadromous eels. bethesda: american fisheries society, symposium 33, pp. 275–284. marchand, j., tanguy, a., laroche, j., quiniou, l. & moraga, d. 2003. responses of european ﬂounder platichthys ﬂesus populations to contamination in different estuaries along the atlantic coast of france. marine ecology progress series, 260: 273–284. masson, g. 1987. biologie et e´cologie d’un poisson plat amphihalin, le flet (platychthys ﬂesus ﬂesus, linne´, 1758) dans l’environnement lige´rien: distribution, de´mographie, place au sein des re´seaux trophiques. brest: universite´ de bretagne occidentale. mcdowall, r.m. 1997. the evolution of diadromy in ﬁshes (revisited) and its place in phylogenetic analysis. reviews in fish biology and fisheries, 7: 443–462. rabiner, l.r. 1989. tutorial on hidden markov models and selected applications in speech recognition. proceedings of the ieee, 77: 257–286. colonisation tactics of juvenile catadromous species radforth, i. 1940. the food of the grayling (thymallus_thymallus), flounder (platichthys ﬂesus), roach (rutilus rutilus) and gudgeon (gobio ﬂuviatilis), with special reference to the tweed watershed. journal of animal ecology, 9: 302–318. secor, d.h. 1999. specifying divergent migrations in the the contingent hypothesis. fisheries concept of research, 43: 13–34. stock: selleslagh, j. & amara, r. 2008. environmental factors structuring ﬁsh composition and assemblages in a small macrotidal estuary (eastern english channel). estuarine, coastal and shelf science, 79: 507–517. sottolichio, a. 1999. mode´lisation de la dynamique des structures turbides (bouchon vaseux et cre´me de vase) dans l’estuaire de la gironde. in: oce´anographie. universite´ de bordeaux i: talence, p. 184. tabouret, h., bareille, g., claverie, f., pe´cheyran, c., prouzet, p. & donard, o.f.x. 2010. simultaneous use of stron- tium:calcium and barium:calcium ratios in otoliths as markers (anguilla of habitat: application to the european eel anguilla) in the adour basin, south west france. marine environmental research, 70: 35–45. tesch, f.-w. 2003. the eel. oxford, uk: blackwell publishing. tsukamoto, k. & aoyama, j. 1998. evolution of freshwater eels of the genus anguilla: a probable scenario. environ- mental biology of fishes, 52: 139–148. tsukamoto, k. & arai, t. 2001. facultative catadromy of the eel anguilla japonica between freshwater and seawater habitats. marine ecology progress series, 220: 265–276. tsukamoto, k., nakai, i. & tesch, w.v. 1998. do all freshwater eels migrate? nature, 396: 635. tzeng, w.n., wang, c.h., wickstrom, h. & reizenstein, m. 2000. occurrence of the semi-catadromous european eel anguilla anguilla in the baltic sea. marine biology, 137: 93–98. yoh, y., tsuguo, o. & hideaki, y. 2000. relative contributions from exposed inshore and estuarine nursery grounds to the recruitment of stone ﬂounder, platichthys bicoloratus, esti- mated using otolith sr:ca ratios. fisheries oceanography, 9: 316–327. 51  