ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 377–383 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish determining the spatial distribution of spawning by anadromous and resident brown_trout salmo_trutta l using strontium content of eggs collected from redds esben a. kristensen1, gerard p. closs2, ricky olley3, jonathan kim4, malcolm reid4, claudine stirling5 1aarhus university, national environmental research institute, department of freshwater ecology, vejlsøvej, silkeborg, denmark 2department of zoology, university of otago, dunedin, new zealand 3nelson ⁄ marlborough fish and game, nelson, new zealand 4department of chemistry, university of otago, dunedin, new zealand 5community trust of otago centre for trace element analysis, department of chemistry, university of otago, dunedin, new zealand accepted for publication august 31, 2010 abstract – strontium (sr) content of eggs collected from redds were used to determine the spawning contribution of resident and anadromous female brown_trout in the taieri river, new zealand and were analysed on the catchment and tributary scale. at the catchment scale, analysis of sr showed differences between eggs collected above and below the taieri river gorge. samples collected above the gorge all had low-sr concentrations similar to levels found in an entirely resident brown_trout population. samples collected below the gorge exhibited a broad range in sr concentrations, ranging from levels comparable to the known anadromous samples to levels comparable to the known freshwater-resident samples. this suggests that the gorge prevents upstream migration by anadromous brown_trout in the taieri river. at the tributary scale, this pattern of anadromous brown_trout spawning downstream of freshwater- resident ﬁsh was repeated in one of the two tributaries located downstream of the gorge. energetic cost of migration is the most likely explanation for the observed patterns in catchment and tributary scale distribution of spawning by resident and anadromous brown_trout. it is concluded that the use of sr concentrations in eggs collected from redds is a cost-effective and reliable method to investigate the spawning contribution by anadromous brown_trout. key words: trace elements; migration; salmonids; new zealand introduction regions, populations of dispersal and migration across large spatial scales and ﬂexible life histories are important features of the population dynamics of many salmonid species (rieman et al. 1994; klemetsen et al. 2003). in coastal salmonids often consist of anadromous, freshwater migratory and freshwater-resident ﬁsh (elliott 1994; rieman et al. 1994; limburg et al. 2001; pettersson et al. 2001). understanding the extent of, and factors driving life history patterns and migration over large spatial scales, and the relative contribution of migratory and resident ﬁsh to population dynamics at various locations represents a major research and management challenge. migratory life history strategies are gen- erally expected if the beneﬁts of migration exceed costs in terms of life-time ﬁtness (gross 1987). migratory individuals often experience faster growth and higher fecundity, both traits generally associated with higher ﬁtness (roff 1988; jonsson & jonsson 1993; frier 1994). however, migration is also associated with signiﬁcant energetic costs and in- creased risk of mortality (bohlin et al. 2001); there- fore, the proportion of migratory individuals within a population can be expected to decline with increasing correspondence: e. a. kristensen, aarhus university, national environmental research institute, department of freshwater ecology, vejlsøvej 25, po box 314, silkeborg, denmark. e-mail: ek@dmu.dk doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00451.x 377 kristensen et al. distance or difﬁculties over which individuals must migrate to complete their life cycle. several methods have been used to determine the extent of migration and the proportion of anadromous and freshwater-resident individuals in salmonid popu- lations, including morphology and colouration (scott 1964), carotenoid pigment proﬁles in muscle tissue (youngson et al. 1997), strontium content of scales (eek & bohlin 1997; koksvik & steinnes 2005) and otoliths (howland et al. 2001; limburg et al. 2001) and ratios of carbon and nitrogen isotopes (mccarthy & waldron 2000; charles et al. 2004). whilst each of these methods has been used successfully in various studies to assess migration in salmonids, all require the capture of adult or juvenile ﬁsh which can at times present difﬁculties. this can be particularly challen- ging if assessing catchment-scale movement and distribution over a short-time interval, such as the relatively brief period during which adult ﬁsh are undertaking spawning migrations (rustadbakken et al. 2004). sampling of eggs in redds is a method that could be used to measure the extent of anadromous migration, but seems to have received little attention. examina- tion of eggs collected directly from either anadromous and freshwater-resident salmonids suggests that their eggs can be distinguished in a variety of ways with varying levels of accuracy, including egg size and weight (elliott 1988; olofsson & mosegaard 1999), lipid, carotenoid and fatty acid composition (pickova et al. 1999; haliloglu et al. 2004) or trace element (speciﬁcally strontium (sr)) composition (kalish 1990). elliott (1995) also observed that egg density in redds formed by anadromous and freshwater- resident ﬁsh differed. if the eggs of anadromous and freshwater-resident salmonids can be reliably identi- ﬁed, then sampling of redds would appear to be a potentially useful method for mapping the catchment- scale extent of upstream migration by anadromous female ﬁsh given that spawned eggs can be readily collected from redds over a relatively extended but reasonably well-deﬁned period of time. analysis of the trace element composition of eggs, particularly if comparing differences in sr, would appear to be the most promising approach for assessing the extent of catchment-scale upstream migration of anadromous salmonids. levels of sr in the tissues and eggs of anadromous ﬁsh are relatively high compared to freshwater-resident ﬁsh (kalish 1990) and reﬂect the generally higher concentrations of sr in seawater relative to freshwater (rosenthal et al. 1970). the higher levels of sr in tissues from anadromous ﬁsh can, however, be inﬂuenced by the amount of time these ﬁsh spend in freshwater prior spawning (donohoe et al. 2008). strontium has the same valence state (2+) and similar ionic radius to 378 calcium (strontium: 1.13 a˚ ; calcium: 0.99 a˚ ) and is therefore incorporated into various tissues within a ﬁsh in much the same manner (radtke 1989). waite et al. (2008) recently demonstrated that the sr content of brown_trout eggs closely reﬂects recent maternal habitat use (marine, estuarine or riverine). gabrielsson, r.m., closs, g.p., kim, j. and reid, m.r. (unpub- lished data) have also demonstrated that the concen- trations of most in developing brown_trout eggs are unaffected by ambient trace element concentrations in the surround- ing water and remain stable until hatching. trace elements (including sr) based on these studies, we predicted that the sr content of eggs collected from spawning redds would reﬂect the distribution of spawning by anadromous and freshwater-resident female brown_trout salmo_trutta l, in the taieri river, a relatively large new zealand river system. we predicted that eggs collected from redds downstream of a signiﬁcant barrier to upstream migration (the taieri river gorge) would contain eggs from sea-run, estuarine and freshwater- resident ﬁsh, thus exhibiting high, intermediate and low levels of sr. in contrast, eggs collected upstream of the gorge would be dominated by ﬁsh from freshwater habitats, and thus exhibit generally low-sr levels, with only the occasional redd from sea-run or estuarine migrants (represented by high- or intermedi- ate-sr levels). further upstream, an impermeable barrier to upstream migration exists (paerau weir), thus sr concentrations in eggs collected from redds upstream of the weir would be uniformly low in sr. at a smaller spatial scale, spawning by anadromous ﬁsh (represented by high-sr eggs) would dominate the lower reaches of silverstream and big stream, the two streams in the lower taieri catchment most likely used for spawning by anadromous brown_trout. eggs from resident ﬁsh, represented by low sr, would be more frequently collected from the upstream reaches of each of these two streams. methods study sites the taieri river is located in south-east south island, new zealand (fig. 1), is 310 km long, with a mean )1 and a catchment area of discharge of 37 m3æs 5650 km2. the river has a large estuary, with the lower 20 km being tidally inﬂuenced. two major barriers to migration along the river exist. the taieri river gorge, which extends from approximately 50 to 70 km from the river mouth (fig. 2), is likely to severely limit upstream movement by migratory anadromous brown_trout given the distance inland, a gain in altitude of approximately 160 m over 20 km and the presence of several rapids and small waterfalls strontium content of brown_trout eggs migration for brown_trout (see crowl et al. 1997), although extensive spawning habitat is available on silverstream downstream of the weir. collection of eggs brown_trout eggs were collected from redds along ﬁve tributaries of the taieri river (fig. 1); brown_trout is the dominant salmonid in the taieri river catchment, and the redds of no other salmonid species were likely to be encountered in the relatively small tributaries sampled. the ﬁve tributaries sampled represent the most important brown_trout spawning tributaries within the lower, middle and upper sections of the taieri river catchment (kristensen 2006). two tributaries were located downstream of the taieri river gorge (silverstream and big stream), two tributaries were located between the gorge and the paerau weir (sutton stream, cap burn) and one tributary was located upstream of the paerau weir (logan burn). as this weir restricts all upstream migration, eggs collected in logan burn could only have been spawned by freshwater-resident brown_trout. in addition to the eggs collected from the taieri river tributaries, eggs from ﬁve redds spawned by known anadromous ﬁsh were collected from careys creek. this creek ﬂows into the otago harbour and has only a small tidal estuary with limited freshwater input (fig. 1). it supports a known population of anadromous brown_trout and few, if any, freshwater- resident trout (r. fitzpatrick, 2006 pers. comm.). all eggs were collected by sampling recently formed spawning redds. redds were identiﬁed as discrete patches of freshly disturbed gravels most often located at the downstream end of pools. a random subsample of redds distributed along the entire length of each stream where trout spawning had occurred was sampled. redd gravels were dug over until eggs were washed free and collected in a ﬁne mesh net positioned downstream. once sufﬁcient eggs were collected (30– 40 eggs), gravels were replaced to protect the remaining eggs. eggs were not collected where there was evidence that multiple redds were superimposed (more than one scrape or gravel mound in the area of interest). however, despite avoiding clearly super- imposed redds, some eggs from more than one female (evident by a clear difference in egg size or colour) were present in a few samples. where this occurred the ‘different’ eggs were separated and removed before further analysis. collection of samples was spread over 3 months (between may and july 2003). to avoid resampling redds, gps and the location of nearby physical markers were used to precisely identify redd positions. an extended period of sampling was used to avoid any bias caused by possible differences in spawning time of resident and 379 fig. 1. map showing location of taieri catchment and the study area including the location of the taieri river gorge and paerau weir (solid bar). numbers identify the six tributaries along which eggs were collected: 1. careys creek; 2. silverstream; 3. big stream; 4. sutton stream; 5. cap burn; and 6. logan burn. ) m ( n o i t a v e e l 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 0 paerau weir taieri gorge 50 100 150 200 250 distance inland (km) fig. 2. elevation proﬁle for the taieri river with black squares indicating locations of conﬂuence points of the ﬁve sampled tributaries and approximate locations of taieri gorge and paerau weir. with vertical drops in excess of 1 m. in the upper reaches, the paerau weir prevents any upstream migration, isolating the brown_trout population in the upper catchment. a 3-m high weir on the upper reaches of silverstream also prevents further upstream kristensen et al. migratory brown_trout. egg samples were initially chilled on ice, and then stored frozen at )20°c until analysis. a total of 107 redds were sampled; 40 from silverstream, 32 from big stream, 10 from sutton stream, 12 from cap burn, 13 from logan burn and 5 from careys creek. sample processing to determine sr content of eggs collected from redds, approximately 2 g (wet weight) of eggs was measured into acid washed (50% hcl for minimum 3 days) 50- ml conical ﬂasks and dried for 24 h at 80°c. samples were then reweighed to give dry weights and transferred to a 520°c mufﬂe furnace for 48 h for ashing. after reweighing the samples, the ﬂasks were placed on a hot plate, and 1 ml of concentrated nitric acid (hno3, sub-boiling distilled) was added to each sample. these were gently reﬂuxed until almost dry, at which point another 1 ml hno3 was added, and the process was repeated. samples were then removed from the heat source and cooled, after which 1 ml hno3 was added. after 5 min digestion, the samples were diluted to 20 ml with distilled deionised water (milliq, 18 mxæcm egg samples were digested and analysed in three batches. for each batch, several sample blanks were subjected to the same treatment as the samples to measure sr back- ground levels. )1). the for inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (icpms) on an agilent 7500 was used to analyse egg samples strontium (sr). a babbington nebulizer with natural aspiration rates of approxi- )1 was used to inject samples into mately 0.4 mlæmin the plasma. standard solutions of sr in dilute acid were used for initial instrument calibrations and were analysed before and after each batch of samples. indium was added as an internal standard during initial sample preparation to correct for instrument drift. the assay sequence was also randomised across samples to eliminate analytical bias, and analytical consistency was checked by analysing duplicate samples. the data were reduced ofﬂine in excel spreadsheets, and )1 element concentrations were calculated in nmolesæg dry mass. egg duplicates were consistent to within 5%. concentrations of sr were compared among the six locations using one-way anova (quinn & keough 2002). results )1 formly high-sr concentrations (sr >150 nmole sræg dry weight egg). samples collected from silverstream and big stream, both downstream of the taieri river gorge exhibited a broad range in sr concentrations, ranging from levels comparable to the known anadromous samples from careys creek to levels comparable to the known freshwater-resident ﬁsh collected upstream of the paerau weir in logan burn )1 dry weight egg; fig. 3). samples (<150 nmole sræg collected from cap burn and sutton stream, both tributaries upstream of the taieri gorge, exhibited uniformly low-sr concentrations comparable and not signiﬁcantly different from the known freshwater residents collected from logan burn (<150 nmole sræg )1 dry weight egg; fig. 3). within silverstream, eggs containing concentrations )1 dry weight egg were of sr >150 nmole sræg predominantly collected from the downstream end of the sampled reach (fig. 4). eggs with <150 nmole )1 dry weight egg were collected only in the sræg upstream end of the sampled reach (fig. 4). all four the silverstream weir redds sampled upstream of )1 dry weight egg (fig. 4). contained <150 nmole sræg in big stream, sr concentrations varied widely along the entire sampled reach, with sr concentrations above )1 dry weight egg being and below 150 nmole sræg recorded throughout the sampled reach (fig. 4). discussion the results from this study suggest that the presence of a steep gorge on the taieri river largely prevents upstream migration by anadromous brown_trout. the ) t w y r d 1 – g · s e o m n ( r l s 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 careys creek silver stream big stream suttonstream cap burn loganburn sr concentrations were signiﬁcantly different among the six locations, and sr levels were signiﬁcantly lower in samples collected above the taieri river gorge than below (p < 0.001, fig. 3). the ﬁve samples from careys creek (known anadromous) exhibited uni- fig. 3. scatter plot showing strontium concentrations in brown )1 dry weight egg) collected from spawning trout eggs (nmole sræg reeds along careys creek (known anadromous ﬁsh), silverstream and big stream (located downstream of the taieri gorge) and sutton stream, cap burn and logan burn (located upstream of the taieri gorge). 380 (a) (b) redds from anadromous trout (s sr fig. 4. distribution of )1 dry weight egg) and freshwater-resident (d sr >150 nmole sræg )1 dry weight egg) along (a) silverstream and (b) <150 nmole sræg big stream. numbers along stream indicate where >1 redds were sampled at a single location, and black bar indicates location of weir. proportion of egg samples with relatively high-sr )1 dry weight egg) concentrations (>150 nmole sræg was high in the two tributaries located below the taieri )1 egg river gorge, but consistently <150 nmole sræg in the tributaries located above the gorge. high concentrations of sr in eggs indicate that the female ﬁsh have been living in a sr-rich environment during the period of egg formation (kalish 1990; waite et al. 2008). furthermore, the egg samples collected in tributaries above the gorge all had sr concentrations similar to the samples from logan burn, a stream in which only freshwater-resident ﬁsh could spawn. the presence of multiple small rapids and waterfalls, some with vertical drops of over 1 metre, along the taieri gorge is a feature that would typically be expected to represent a high metabolic cost for upstream migration (jonsson et al. 1997; leonard & mccormick 1999; bohlin et al. 2001; klemetsen et al. 2003). anecdotally, spawning by anadromous brown_trout has been thought to occur in the taieri river much further upstream than suggested in this study; hence, this research has provided new information that will be strontium content of brown_trout eggs useful in management of brown_trout in the river. the number of egg samples collected from tributaries above the gorge was relatively low (n = 25), and no samples were collected from the main taieri river. it is therefore possible that some spawning by anadro- mous brown_trout was missed in this study. micro- chemical analyses of otoliths from adult brown_trout collected from the main stem of the taieri river above and below the gorge found high-strontium levels (indicating marine inﬂuence) in a single ﬁsh collected above the gorge but in all ﬁsh collected below the gorge (kristensen 2006). this suggests that whilst anadromous brown_trout are occasionally capable of migrating through the gorge, at a population level anadromous ﬁsh do not play a major role in the dynamics of brown_trout upstream of taieri gorge. at smaller scales, this pattern of anadromous brown_trout spawning downstream of freshwater-resident ﬁsh was repeated in silverstream, but not big stream. silverstream enters the taieri river approximately 2 km upstream of the tidal limit and represents the ﬁrst major spawning tributary entering the taieri river upstream of the estuarine reaches. hence, it might be expected that large numbers of anadromous ﬁsh would use this stream for spawning. the distance from the silverstream ⁄ taieri river conﬂuence to the silver- stream weir is approximately 30 km with an altitude gain of over 100 m over this distance. the overlapping pattern of spawning by anadromous and freshwater- resident ﬁsh along the upstream section of this reach suggests that the energetic costs of anadromous migration (bohlin et al. 2001) were beginning to outweigh the beneﬁts along this section. as expected, no spawning by anadromous trout was recorded upstream of the 3-m high weir, although only limited sampling was conducted. (crowl et al. 1997) found that 3-m waterfalls were sufﬁcient to prevent upstream invasion of brown_trout elsewhere in the taieri catchment. spawning by anadromous and freshwater- resident ﬁsh occurred throughout the entire reach sampled along big stream. however, although the big stream conﬂuence was further inland relative to silverstream, the sampled reach was relatively short (<10 km) with an altitude gain of only 40 m from conﬂuence to the upstream end of the site (with the most upstream redd sampled in big stream at a slightly lower altitude than the most upstream redd sampled in silverstream). hence, once anadromous ﬁsh reached the big stream ⁄ taieri river conﬂuence, there were few, if any, barriers to migration along big stream. evaluation of method the results from the present study suggest that the analysis of the trace element composition of eggs 381 kristensen et al. (speciﬁcally sr in this study) collected from spawning redds is a useful method for mapping the extent of upstream spawning migrations by female anadromous ﬁsh. this is the ﬁrst study to utilise this approach to precisely map the upstream extent of spawning by anadromous ﬁsh. the study builds on previous work by kalish (1990) who identiﬁed differing sr levels in anadromous and freshwater rainbow trout, waite et al. (2008) who conﬁrmed that sr levels in eggs reﬂect the recent maternal habitat use and gabrielsson et al. (submitted) who found that the trace element compo- sition of spawned developing eggs remains stable and unaffected by ambient trace element concentrations over the entire period of incubation in redds. the range of sr concentrations observed in eggs in this )1 dry weight study (approximately 50–290 nmole sræg egg) was greater than waite et al. (2008; approxi- )1 dry weight egg), suggest- mately 30–110 nmole sræg ing waite et al. likely sampled a population of estuarine and freshwater-resident ﬁsh in the much larger clutha river. the distribution of spawning in the taieri catchment observed is broadly consistent with patterns observed in other catchments and reported in earlier literature (scott 1964; eek & bohlin 1997; youngson et al. 1997; mccarthy & waldron 2000; howland et al. 2001; limburg et al. 2001; charles et al. 2004; koksvik & steinnes 2005), but the combination of precision, detail and spatial extent achieved in this study is considerably greater. our results indicate that the collection and analysis of eggs from spawning redds represent an effective, accurate and relatively inexpensive method for determining the extent of catchment-wide and with- in-stream migration by anadromous trout, with only a minimal impact on population dynamics and a low ethical cost. (2008) most acknowledgements this research was supported by a grant from university of otago to gpc. we thank k. garret, m. date, q. cannon and barry anderson for ﬁeld and laboratory support. we also thank the community trust of otago for a donation allowing the purchase of the icpms and associated facilities. references bohlin, t., pettersson, j. & degerman, e. 2001. population density of migratory and resident brown_trout (salmo_trutta) in relation to altitude: evidence for a migration cost. journal of animal ecology 70: 112–121. charles, k., roussel, j.m. & cunjak, r.a. 2004. estimating the and freshwater to juvenile production. marine and contribution of resident brown_trout freshwater research 55: 185–191. sympatric anadromous crowl, t.a., townsend, c.r., bouwes, n. & thomas, h. 1997. scales and causes of patchiness in stream invertebrate 382 assemblages: top-down predator effects? journal of the north american benthological society 16: 277–285. donohoe, c.j., adams, p.b. & royer, c.f. 2008. inﬂuence of water chemistry and migratory distance on the ability to distinguish progeny of sympatric resident and anadromous rainbow trout. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 65: 1–6. eek, d. & bohlin, t. 1997. strontium in scales veriﬁes that sympatric sea-run and stream-resident brown_trout can be distinguished by coloration. journal of fish biology 51: 659– 661. elliott, j.m. 1988. growth, size, biomass and production in contrasting populations of trout salmo_trutta in two lake district streams. journal of animal ecology 57: 49–60. elliott, j.m. 1994. quantitative ecology and the brown_trout. oxford: oxford university press. 286 pp. elliott, j.m. 1995. fecundity and egg density in the redd for sea_trout. journal of fish biology 47: 893–901. frier, j.-o. 1994. growth of anadromous and resident brown_trout with different life histories in a danish lowland stream. nordic journal of freshwater research 60: 58–70. gross, m.r. 1987. evolution of diadromy in ﬁshes. american fisheries society symposium 1: 14–25. haliloglu, h.i., bayır, a., sirkecioglu, a.n., aras, n.m. & atamanalp, m. 2004. comparison of fatty acid composition in some tissues of rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) living in seawater and freshwater. food chemistry 86: 55–59. howland, k.l., tonn, w.m., babluk, j.a. & tallman, r.f. 2001. identiﬁcation of freshwater and anadromous inconnu in the mackenzie river system by analysis of otolith strontium. transactions of the american fisheries society 130: 725– 741. jonsson, b. & jonsson, n. 1993. partial migration: niche shift versus sexual maturation in ﬁshes. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 3: 348–365. jonsson, n., jonsson, b. & hansen, l.p. 1997. changes in proximate composition and estimates of energetic costs during upstream migration and spawning in atlantic salmon salmo_salar. journal of animal ecology 66: 425–436. kalish, j.m. 1990. use of otolith microchemistry to distinguish the progeny of sympatric anadromous and non-anadromous salmonids. fishery bulletin of the u.s. fish and wildlife service 88: 657–666. klemetsen, a., amundsen, p.a., dempson, j.b., jonsson, b., jonsson, n., o’connell, m.f. & mortensen, e. 2003. atlantic salmon salmo_salar l., brown_trout salmo_trutta l. and arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus (l.): a review of aspects of their life histories. ecology of freshwater fish 12: 1–59. koksvik, j.i. & steinnes, e. 2005. strontium content of scales as a marker for distinguishing between sea_trout and brown_trout. hydrobiologia 544: 51–54. kristensen, e.a. 2006. population dynamics, spawning and movements of brown_trout in taieri river tributary streams. phd thesis. dunedin: university of otago. leonard, j.b.k. & mccormick, s.d. 1999. the effect of migration distance and timing on metabolic enzyme activity the american shad (alosa in an anadromous clupeid, sapidissima). fish physiology and biochemistry 20: 163– 179. limburg, k.e., landergren, p., westin, l., elfman, m. & kristiansson, p. 2001. flexible modes of anadromy in baltic sea_trout: making the most of marginal spawning streams. journal of fish biology 59: 682–695. mccarthy, i.d. & waldron, s. 2000. identifying migratory salmo_trutta using carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios. rapid communications in mass spectrometry 14: 1325– 1331. olofsson, h. & mosegaard, h. 1999. larger eggs in resident brown_trout living in sympatry with anadromous brown_trout. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 59–64. pettersson, j.c.e., hansen, m.m. & bohlin, t. 2001. does dispersal from landlocked trout explain the coexistence of resident and migratory trout females in a small stream? journal of fish biology 58: 487–495. pickova, j., kiessling, a., pettersson, a. & dutta, p. 1999. fatty acid and carotenoid composition of eggs from two nonanadromous atlantic salmon stocks of cultured and wild origin. fish physiology and biochemistry 21: 147–156. quinn, g.p. & keough, m.j. 2002. experimental design and data analysis for biologists. cambridge: cambridge uni- versity press. 537 pp. radtke, j.m. 1989. strontium-calcium concentration ratios in indicators. comparative ﬁsh otoliths as environmental biochemistry and physiology 92a: 189–193. rieman, b.e., myers, d.l. & nielsen, r.l. 1994. use of otolith microchemistry to discriminate oncorhynchus_nerka of strontium content of brown_trout eggs resident and anadromous origin. canadian journal of fish- eries and aquatic sciences 51: 68–77. roff, d.a. 1988. the evolution of migration and some life history parameters in marine ﬁshes. environmental biology of ﬁshes 22: 133–146. rosenthal, h.l., eves, m.m. & cochran, o.a. 1970. common strontium concentrations of mineralized tissues from marine and sweet water animals. comparative biochemistry and physiology 32: 445–450. rustadbakken, a., l’abee-lund, j.h., arnekleiv, j.v. & kraabøl, m. 2004. reproductive migration of brown_trout in a small norwegian river studied by telemetry. journal of fish biology 64: 2–15. scott, d. 1964. the migratory trout (salmo_trutta l.) in new zealand. i. the introduction of stocks. transactions of the royal society of new zealand, zoology 4: 209–227. waite, e.m., closs, g.p., kim, j.p., barry, b., markwitz, a. & fitzpatrick, r. 2008. the strontium content of roe collected from spawning brown_trout salmo_trutta l. reﬂects recent otolith microchemistry. journal of fish biology 72: 1847– 1854. youngson, a.f., mitchell, a.i., noack, p.t. & laird, l.m. 1997. carotenoid pigment proﬁles distinguish anadromous and nonanadromous brown_trout (salmo_trutta). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 54: 1064–1066. 383  