ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 492–494 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved letter ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish sexual behaviour of a masu salmon parr, with implications for the evolution of parr sexual behaviour in the salmonines manu esteve1, deborah a. mclennan1, mitsuru kawahara2 1department of ecology and evolutionary biology, university of toronto, toronto, on, canada 2151 higasimati onishibetsu sarufutsu-village, hokkaido, japan accepted for publication september 4, 2010 the salmonines are a subfamily of teleost ﬁsh containing at least six genera (brachymystax, hucho, parahucho, salvelinus, salmo and oncorhynchus) that are naturally distributed in the cold temperate waters of the northern hemisphere. many species of salmo, salvelinus and oncorhynchus have parr that mature precociously and are able to spawn with adult females (fleming 1998 and references therein). parr congregate around nesting females when the spawning season starts. they establish a dominance hierarchy, in which larger parr hold the best positions within the redd, edging in as close to the nest as possible (e.g., thomaz et al. 1997; koseki & maekawa 2000). at the moment of spawning, dominant parr, and occasionally sub- dominant ones sheltering in refuges around the nest (esteve 2005), dart beside or between the spawning pair and release milt. the reproductive contribution of such males is not trivial, 40–60% eggs are fertilised by parr in some atlantic salmon populations (garant et al. 2001; garcı´a-va´zquez et al. 2001; taggart et al. 2001). there is only one paper describing the actual behaviour a parr performs during spawning. jones & king (1952) reported that an atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) parr gaped his mouth and trembled his body during milt release in a manner very similar to that shown by adult males. are gaping and trembling part of the salmonine parr behavioural repertoire or are they unique to s. salar? for over 50 years, this question has remained unanswered. in 2007, we videotaped the spawning behaviour of masu salmon (oncorhynchus_masou) in the sanru river, northern hokkaido, japan using a sony trv 900 colour digital to date, video mounted inside an underwater housing, operated remotely (for details of the study see esteve et al. 2009). we recorded a spawning episode in which the behaviours of the nesting female (approximately 50– 60 cm in length), the adult male (70–80 cm) courting and guarding her and a parr (12–14 cm) were captured on ﬁlm (supporting information video clip s1). the parr was recorded quivering, a typical salmo- nine male courtship behaviour consisting of high frequency and short amplitude body vibrations directed towards the female while their bodies are parallel to each other. quivering was recorded on three occasions (46, 39 and 35 min before the spawning act). all three quiverings followed a similar pattern: the parr, hovering in a position approximately 10– 15 cm above the gravel and about 20 cm to the side of the female, descended towards the female. once he contacted her side, he began quivering and moved down her body to the anal ﬁn. at this point, he began an accelerated movement upwards while partially gaping his mouth. each quivering episode lasted for about one second. the spawning act occurred at 17:14 (local time). at that time, the female was being courted and guarded by an adult male located on her left side. the parr was located on her right approximately 15 cm away. seven seconds before the female initiated spawning, the parr charged and chased away another parr located one metre downstream from the nest. two seconds later, he was back in his original position. five seconds later, the female initiated spawning by lying on the nest with her anal ﬁn pressed into the gravel, her tail raised upwards, her jaws agape and her correspondence: m. esteve, department of ecology and evolutionary biology, university of toronto, 25 willcocks street, toronto, on, canada m5s 3b2. e-mail: manu.esteve@utoronto.ca 492 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00455.x body trembling. the parr then moved close to the female’s anal ﬁn and started trembling his body. trembling differed from normal quivering in having a shorter frequency and larger amplitude and in being concentrated along only the posterior half of his body. he gaped his mouth and trembled his body for 1.5 s (fig. 1). after spawning, the parr moved upwards and slightly backwards until he disappeared into the adult male sperm cloud. our results mirror those of jones & king (1952) for atlantic salmon; parr from both species respond to the presence of a spawning female by quivering, the basic courtship behaviour of salmonine males, trembling and gaping during milt release in a manner similar to that displayed by an adult male. quivering, trembling and gaping are ﬁxed action patterns-invariant se- quences of actions that can be elicited over and over when presented with the right external stimuli (tinbergen 1951). in this case, the stimuli (releasers) are vibrational and visual cues provided by a female when she initiates spawning (satou et al. 1994; esteve 2007). our observations conﬁrm that precocious parr are neurologically able to respond to those releasers in a manner similar to an adult male even though they are much smaller physically. this would seem to be a classic case of paedomorphism (alberch et al. 1979); more particularly progenesis, in which development of one character or suite of characters (sexual maturation, including the production of viable sperm and the ability to perform the full repertoire of male breeding behaviours) proceeds at a faster rate than development of other traits (body size). if this hypothesis is correct, then all salmonine precocious parr should display quivering and trembling gaping during milt release. testing this hypothesis requires that ichthyologists return to the ﬁeld to examine behaviour for many fig. 1. masu salmon precocious parr spawning with an adult female. right arrow = dominant parr gaping during milt release. left arrow = another parr approaching. sexual behaviour of a masu salmon parr species. unfortunately, parr behaviour is often ob- the larger male ⁄ female scured by movements of partners and by the larger male’s sperm cloud. difﬁculties aside, without these data, we cannot fully understand the evolution of parr maturity. previous studies have demonstrated that the absence in parr of many traits involved in male–male competition (e.g., hooked snout, humped back, behaviours associated with threatening and ﬁghting) has resulted from selection for traits that increase the effectiveness of being a sneaker (see discussion in koseki & maekawa 2000). based on the observations reported herein, and those of jones & king (1952), it appears that selection has not eliminated traits involved in male–female sexual interactions from the parr’s repertoire. this may be because sexual behaviours such as quivering and trembling are required to stimulate the female and help coordinate partners such are necessary prerequisite to successful spawning. the function of gaping is less clear (e.g., perhaps it is simply a neurological side effect of gamete release; makiguchi et al. 2009). it would be interesting to ask whether parr perform these behaviours with the same intensity and frequency as migratory males and whether a female can be stimulated to spawn with the sexual feedback from only parr males. this information is important because anthropogenic factors such as over ﬁshing and habitat loss ⁄ alteration may be affecting the delicate balance between numbers of migratory and parr males within populations (e.g., gross 1991), and this, in turn, may affect many aspects of the population from genetic structure through adaptedness to survivorship. and as acknowledgements we thank mikiya kasai, rye kasai, kouichi osanai, chiaky osanai and masataka okamoto for assistance during the entire ﬁeld work period. funding was provided by a nserc discovery research grant to d.m. references alberch, p., gould, s.j., oster, g.f. & wake, d.b. 1979. size and shape in ontogeny and phylogeny. paleobiology 5: 296– 317. esteve, m. 2005. observations of spawning behaviour in salmoninae: salmo, oncorhynchus and salvelinus. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 15: 1–2. esteve, m. 2007. two examples of ﬁxed behavioural patterns in female false spawnings and male digging. salmonines: journal of ethology 25: 63–70. esteve, m., mclennan, d. & kawahara, m. 2009. spawning behaviour of sakhalin taimen, parahucho_perryi, from northern hokkaido, japan. environmental biology of fishes 85: 265–273. fleming, i.a. 1998. pattern and variability in the breeding system of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar), with comparisons 493 esteve et al. to other salmonids. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55(supp): 59–76. garant, j., dodson, j. & bernatchez, l. 2001. a genetic evaluation of mating system and determinants of individual reproductive success in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar l.). the journal of heredity 92: 137–145. garcı´a-va´zquez, e., mora´n, p., martı´nez, j.l., pe´rez, j., de gaudemar, b. & beall, e. 2001. alternative mating strategies in atlantic salmon and brown_trout. journal of heredity 92: 146–149. gross, m.r. 1991. salmon breeding behavior and life history evolution in changing environments. ecology 72: 1180– 1186. jones, j.w. & king, g.m. 1952. the spawning of the male salmon parr (salmo_salar linn. juv.). proceedings of the zoological society of london 122: 615–619. koseki, y. & maekawa, k. 2000. sexual selection on mature male parr of masu salmon (oncorhynchus_masou): does sneaking behavior favor small body size and less developed sexual characters? behavioral ecology and sociobiology 48: 211–217. makiguchi, y., nagata, s., kojima, t., ichimura, m., konno, y., murata, h. & ueda, h. 2009. cardiac arrest during gamete release in chum salmon regulated by the parasympathetic nerve system. plos one 4: e5993. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005993. satou, m., takeuchi, h.a., takei, k., hasegawa, t., matsush- ima, t. & okumoto, n. 1994. characterization of vibrational and visual signals which elicit spawning behavior in the male hime salmon (landlocked red salmon, oncorhynchus_nerka). journal of comparative physiology 174: 527–537. taggart, j.b., mclaren, i.s., hay, d.w., webb, j.h. & youngson, a.f. 2001. spawning success in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar l.): a long-term dna proﬁling-based study conducted in a natural stream. molecular ecology 10: 1047– 1060. thomaz, d., beall, e. & burke, t. 1997. alternative reproductive tactics in atlantic salmon: factors affecting mature parr success. proceedings of the royal society of london, b 264: 219–226. tinbergen, n. 1951. the study of instinct. london: oxford university press. supporting information additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article. video clip s1. a masu salmon parr spawns with an adult female. the sequence is repeated in slow motion. please note: wiley-blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors. any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article. 494  