ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 495–496 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved letter ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish student reﬂections on the international symposium on salmonid population ecology in luarca jenn m. burt1, elina halttunen2, marika k. gale1 1paciﬁc salmon ecology and conservation laboratory, centre for applied conservation research, department of forest sciences, university of british columbia, 2424 main mall, vancouver, british columbia, v6t 1z4, canada 2department of arctic and marine biology, faculty of biosciences, fisheries and economics, university of tromsø, no-9037 tromsø, norway accepted for publication 1 october 2010 ‘una mas por favor!’ this seemed to be the parting sentiment from most of the participants of the 2010 international symposium, advances in the population ecology of stream salmonids. held in luarca, a small village in northern spain, the conference brought together university, professional, government and student researchers from over 20 countries spanning europe, north and south america, new zealand and japan. the goal of this meeting was to provide an international forum to (i) update existing knowledge on the population ecology of stream salmonids, (ii) explore how to move from scientiﬁc knowledge to conservation principles to ensure the long-term viability and evolutionary course of salmonids, (iii) evaluate mitigation of human impacts on salmonid populations and (iv) reduce the impacts of exotic salmonids on native faunas where they have been introduced. at the end of the conference, despite being intellectually over sleep-deprived and stuffed, all the symposium attendees we spoke with agreed that an overall rating of excellence was achieved on many levels. here we present student reﬂections on the scientiﬁc insights gained during the conference and the organisational aspects that con- tributed to its overall success. stimulated, the social setting unlike many international ﬁsh meetings, this sympo- sium was not held in a large bustling city, but in a small charismatic ﬁshing village on the northwest coast of asturias, spain. apart from luarca’s inherent picturesque charm and culinary wonders, the primary beneﬁt of the location was the small size of the town. as there were few opportunities for salmon scientists to disperse or emigrate, the atmosphere fostered a sense of intimacy and promoted exceptional opportu- nities for mingling and networking with schools of socialising scientists outside of conference hours. along with these informal dinners and chats, long spanish-style lunches, a day off in the middle for an organised tour of the region and a spectacular ﬁnal banquet provided additional time for connecting one- on-one with colleagues. these interactions were both enjoyable and extremely valuable for students, as they gave us the opportunity to have more in-depth discussions about people’s work and ideas, as well as cultivate inspiration and connections for future projects and collaborations, all in a relaxed and collegial atmosphere. the science over four very full days of symposium and 2 days of workshop, attendees presented 82 talks and 22 posters categorised under a broad range of topics (life history, population dynamics, salmonids as invasives, habitat selection, human impacts, challenges to native salmo- nid conservation, rehabilitation and recovery, and life- time ﬁtness). the presentations were of high quality (even though at times the acoustics were not), and students were well represented among presenters correspondence: jenn burt, centre for applied conservation research, department of forest sciences, university of british columbia, 2424 main mall, vancouver, british columbia, canada, v6t 1z4 tel.: (604) 822 1969, fax: (604) 822 9102. e-mail: jenn.burt@gmail.com doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00462.x 495 salmonid dynamics (e.g. density dependence, abun- dance, movement, competition) within the context of complex food webs and environmental variability (e.g. temperature inﬂuences). the presentations conveyed that stream salmonid research is simulta- neously addressing more in-depth mechanistic ques- tions and striving to map the interconnectivity of the systems we study. indeed, following the symposium, a small number of researchers participated in a very engaging 2-day workshop on combining mark-recapture and geno- type-based pedigree data to estimate the ﬁtness of stream ﬁshes in the wild. as a student, it was a fantastic opportunity to experience the palpable enthusiasm shared by the workshop leaders, dr. ben letcher and dr. asbjorn vollestad, in manifesting a ‘dream’ to create an international network of scientists interested in combining their skills and resources to tackle deeper questions relating to ﬁsh ﬁtness in the wild. after several presentations and much discussion, it seemed that important ﬁrst steps had been carved out in generating ideas for future data collection, analysis, modelling and collaboration. gracias para todo! to conclude, conferences are venues for exceptionally fruitful collisions that can lead to job opportunities, ideas for projects, grant applications and new networks. if we use these unions and the degree of inspiration generated as indicators of the quality of a conference, from a student’s perspective, the luarca 2010 meeting was indeed a great success! we would like to thank all the attendees for their inspiring talks and posters, encouragement, career advice, and of course, lots of laughs. we are especially grateful to the conference organisers for fostering a relaxed and intimate setting at a conference of such high scientiﬁc calibre. it was indeed a life-changing experience for many of us. burt et al. (25%). we found the ‘single session’ symposium format to be enjoyable and effective. because all of the participants were exposed to all of the presenta- tions, we felt facilitated a greater overall familiarity among researchers and a common ground for the major ﬁndings, themes and issues. retrospective discussions of later this that fellow students shared the sentiment the conference offered an excellent snapshot of the issues that currently concern salmon ecologists. in particular, we appreciated the global and future perspectives that were conveyed. for example, we found it interesting to discover that salmonid scientists in the northern and southern hemispheres have radically different research focuses: mapping the threats to salmonids vs. mapping the threats of salmonids, respectively. this illustrated the important role that international conferences can play in communicating information across global boundaries. in addition, as many students are looking for future projects, we gained considerable insight into the areas of research that are becoming increasingly important (for example the consequences of species introductions, escapes and stockings – such as hybridisation and the loss of genetic diversity and ﬁtness). it seems we are arriving at the end of the ‘saving our ﬁsheries by prevailing paradigm of compensating for habitat loss with stocking’. many talks contributed to the mounting evidence that this avenue has only created a plethora of other mechan- isms for the destruction of wild ﬁsh. another theme that was apparent through the presentations was the increasing utilisation of ad- vances in technology (e.g. telemetry and 3d video- graphy with impressive accompanying analysis software) that are allowing researchers to study individual ﬁsh movements and spatial environments on increasingly smaller scales and in greater detail. at the same time, attempts are being made to integrate our understanding of individual and population-level 496  