accepted: 5 december 2016 doi: 10.1111/eff.12333 o r i g i n a l a r t i c l e fish trait diversity in littorals of two floodplain lakes of the highly biodiverse caura river, venezuela gabriela echevarría1 | nirson gonzález2 1laboratorio de biología de organismos, centro de ecología, instituto venezolano de investigaciones científicas, caracas, miranda, venezuela 2laboratorio de ecología de peces, estación de investigaciones hidrobiológicas, fundación la salle de ciencias naturales, campus guayana, san félix, bolívar, venezuela correspondence gabriela echevarría, laboratorio de biología de organismos, centro de ecología, instituto venezolano de investigaciones científicas, caracas, miranda, venezuela. email: hydropsichidae@gmail.com abstract we studied the trait diversity and structure in the fish communities of two floodplain lakes of the caura river: aricagua and paramuto, during one hydrological cycle. we calculated taxonomic and a functional alpha and beta diversities and made compari- sons among hydrological seasons and among habitats within each lake based on rare- factions. the trait structure was explored with an rlq (analysis of a table r of environmental conditions, a table l of abundances of species and a table q of species traits) analysis, and pairwise relationships between environmental variables and traits were explored with fourth- corner analyses. despite its smaller extension, paramuto showed higher alpha taxonomic and trait diversities. the substrates of open sand and those covered by leaf litter were the most diverse habitats in terms of both species and traits. the trait structure of the fish communities was influenced by the hydrological seasons, the lakes as well as water ph and temperature, and in a lesser degree dis- solved oxygen, habitat type and total dissolved solids in the water. these factors con- stitute the habitat templet for the fish community’s composition and trait structure. k e y w o r d s components of beta diversity, fourth-corner analysis, neotropical freshwater fish communities, rlq analysis 1 |  introduction in recent years, the use of traits to explain the process of commu- nity assembly has won great acceptance (mcgill, enquist, weiher, & westoby, 2006). this approach is based upon the theories of habitat filtering (keddy, 1992) and the habitat templet (southwood, 1977), which establish that environmental conditions determine the compo- sition of a community by selecting those species whose traits enhance their survival and reproductive success. several attempts have been made to build up a framework of en- vironment–trait relationships for freshwater ecosystems. they stem from the idea that the conditions of the habitats influence the evolu- tion of the species traits and the assembly of communities. for exam- ple, townsend and hildrew (1994) proposed a number of predictions within a templet created by two axes: temporal variation and spatial heterogeneity. they argued that in temporary habitats, certain traits such as small body size and short lifespan would be favoured, whereas in more stable habitats, other traits such as bigger sizes, migratory be- haviour and longer lifespans, as well as several reproductive episodes and parental care, are more suitable. according to these traits, they proposed a classification of resistant and resilient species. poff (1997), on the other hand, sustained that the features of habitats constitute selective forces that act as filters of the species traits. according to poff, there is a hierarchy of filters dependent on the spatial scale. at the valley–reach scale, some filters such as habitat volume, sediment size, resource availability, wood cover and flood intensity act upon cer- tain fish traits such as body size, reproductive mode, trophic group, habitat group and flood resistance respectively. at the mesohabitat scale, the hydraulic stress and the substrate type act upon the fish body morphology and substrate preference. more recently, thorp, thoms, and delong (2008) enunciated their riverine ecosystem syn- thesis, which hypothesizes among other subjects, that each hydrogeo- morphic patch has a particular templet that determines the taxonomic and trait structure of the communities. for instance, the life strategy 158  |  wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:158–169. © 2017 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n traits in areas that are periodically flooded are related to the predict- ability of the floods and the periods of higher productivity (winemiller, 1989). particularly in tropical floodplain systems, where the floods are highly predictable, the reproduction and development of the aquatic biota are closely linked to the periods of prolonged floods. nevertheless, the discussion about the definition of traits and which are important in the assembly of communities is still open. traits should be measured at the individual level and be comparable among species (mcgill et al., 2006). violle et al. (2007) distinguish functional, response and effect traits. functional traits are those that affect fit- ness via growth, reproduction or survival. response traits are those traits whose attributes vary according to changes in the environmen- tal conditions and finally effect traits reflect the effect of a species on environmental conditions, communities or ecosystem properties. however, there has been some criticism of violle et al. (2007) for their concept of functional trait, as the impacts or effects on eco- systems processes are not clearly implied (mlambo, 2014). frimpong and angermeier (2010) define ecological traits as those that reflect an organism’s environmental preferences and associated behaviours. despite the panoply of concepts, the trait- based approach has contrib- uted greatly to the study of community assembly and is a useful tool to predict the way freshwater fish communities might change due to anthropogenic disturbances (pease, taylor, winemiller, & king, 2015; pool, olden, whittier, & paukert, 2010). for example, it has been ev- idenced that certain traits of predator fish such as the mouth gape size can influence the composition of the communities in neotropical floodplains (montaña, layman, & winemiller, 2011) and likewise that the complexity of mesohabitat structure determines the morphologi- cal diversity of fish assemblages (montaña & winemiller, 2010). the studies of trait diversity and trait relationships in freshwater fish communities have considered different kinds of traits as func- tional. some of these include a combination of life strategy, trophic and physiological traits in temperate lakes (brind’amour, boisclair, dray, & legendre, 2011; strecker et al., 2011), morphometric traits (pease, gonzález- díaz, rodiles- hernández, & winemiller, 2012) or be- havioural traits (fabrício & casatti, 2012) in tropical streams. all these studies have unveiled relationships between environmental conditions and fish traits at different spatial scales. some of the environmental drivers of trait structure of fish communities that have been identified are the structural complexity of habitats (brind’amour et al., 2011), substratum type (pease et al., 2012), altitude, temperature, channel depth, turbidity and conductivity (carvalho & tejerina- garro, 2015). it has also been shown that the drivers of fish communities’ trait struc- ture can vary greatly among years in streams (strecker et al., 2011). on the other hand, the flood pulse has been signalled as the main force in controlling the biota in floodplains (junk, bayley, & sparks, 1989). in these ecosystems, the fish species life cycles are synchronized with the hydrological cycle and also have different adaptations to sur- vive to the temporal variation. some of these adaptations include high mobility to get in and out of the plains according to the occurrence of floods and droughts, or adaptations to endure the dry periods such as the capability to breathe oxygen from the air. the changes in conditions among hydrological seasons result in great losses for animal populations,     |  159 although during the flood, annual migrations of fishes generate a high transfer of energy from the rivers to the plains. the seasonal species reproduce at the beginning of the rainy season and concentrate in high abundances in the floodplains. as the rains continue, the opportunistic strategists increase their densities, which start to decrease during fall- ing waters (winemiller, 1989). in contrast, the k strategists have rela- tively constant densities across the hydrological cycle. in the floodplain of the orinoco river, rodríguez and lewis (1997) proposed a model of lake morphometry, transparency and piscivory to explain the assembly of fish communities. this model predicts that the water transparency determines the group of piscivores that are dominant in the communities. in clear waters, this group is repre- sented by species that are visually oriented to catch their prey such as species of the cichlidae family, whereas in turbid waters, it is repre- sented by species with sensory adaptations such as catfishes and knife fishes. according to the authors, as water transparency is a function of water depth, the morphometry of the floodplain lakes influences the interactions among predators and prey by determining the type of dominant predator. this model also predicts that during low waters, the water transparency decreases, and therefore, the abundances of predators with sensory adaptations increase, and this produces signif- icant changes in the fish communities’ structure among hydrological seasons. however, without regard of the type of dominant piscivore group, during low waters, the piscivory has been associated with de- creases in fish abundances and diversity in communities of neotropical floodplains (rondón suárez, júnior, & catella, 2004; scarabotti, lópez, & pouilly, 2011; winemiller, 1996). as for the assembly patterns of fish communities at the mesohab- itat scale in tropical floodplains, arrington, winemiller, and layman (2005) found that they depended on the specific responses of the spe- cies to the patches features and species interactions. in more structur- ally complex patches, the fish densities tended to be higher. likewise, in older patches, the abundances of fishes were influenced by habitat features, whereas in newer patches, the assembly was dominated by dispersal. arrington and winemiller (2006) also found a greater species selectivity during low waters in comparison with the transitional sea- sons of rising and falling waters. this pattern led to very different com- positions of species among different patch types such as submerged wood, open sand and leaf litter during low waters. even though the proportion of invertivorous taxa was high in the three habitats, they observed a higher number of algae grazers within the submerged wood. the authors concluded that the assembly at this spatial scale is driven by mobility control, where the particular features of habitats favour differential colonization and or survival of the species, giving way to predictable patterns of community assembly. in other aquatic ecosystems, associations between feeding traits and particular meso- habitats have been observed (brind’amour et al., 2011). in this article, we explored the spatiotemporal patterns of trait di- versity in the fish communities inhabiting the littorals of two floodplain lakes of the caura river with different areas and water depth and exam- ined the influence of environmental variables on the trait structure. due to limitations in the scale of the sampling site, this study pretends to explain the fish community organization only at the mesohabitat scale, 160  |     and only for the littorals of the lakes. our goal was to identify changes in trait diversity due to spatial variability at the local scale and among lakes, as well as changes due to temporal variability across a hydro- logical cycle. the caura river basin is one of the largest of venezuela, representing four per cent of the country’s territory. it is also one of the most diverse basins of the orinoco drainage (chernoff, machado- allison, riseng, & montanbault, 2003), with an estimated richness of more than 500 fish species, and new species are still being added to the list (gonzález et al. 2012). this area is currently under threat due to log- ging and agricultural activities (chernoff et al., 2003): illegal gold min- ing in the upper basin, and recently, the venezuelan national executive approved a decree that commands the exploitation of gold, diamonds and other minerals in an area that encompasses the caura’s floodplain. additionally, the fisheries in the lower caura are intense. this is wors- ened by the fact that currently, fisheries data in the caura basin are either inexistent or unreliable. the last standardized data come from a census carried out by wildlife conservation society from 2007 to 2009. following the landscape filters concept of poff (1997), we antici- pated that the species and trait diversities in paramuto would be higher because of its greater water depth in comparison with aricagua, and also that it would be associated to bigger sizes for the same reason. based on junk et al. (1989), we predicted that the species and trait di- versity would be higher in the two lakes during high waters due to col- onization processes and the arrival of migratory species from the main channel of the caura river. during low waters, based on the findings in other tropical floodplains, we expected lower species and trait diver- sities as a result of intense piscivory. following winemiller (1989), we expected to find an association of high waters with the opportunistic strategy. based on the predictions of the model of lake morphometry, transparency and piscivory of rodríguez and lewis (1997), we expected to find an association of sensory- oriented piscivores with the phase of low waters and an association of those visually oriented with the phase of high waters. finally, at the mesohabitat scale, based on the findings of arrington et al. (2005) and arrington and winemiller (2006), we ex- pected to observe a higher diversity in the habitats of submerged logs and substrates covered by leaf litter because of their higher structural complexity in comparison with the substrates of open sand. ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n 2 |  materials and methods 2.1 | study area the aricagua and paramuto floodplain lakes are located within the floodplain of caura river (figure 1), near its confluence with the orinoco river (07°32′n–64°59′w and 07°35′n–65°09′w) along the southern shore of the orinoco, at the northern end of the guyana shield, in venezuela. both lakes start to connect to the caura river during the beginning of the raising waters season from may to july and remain connected through the season of high waters, approxi- mately from august to november, when the falling waters begin. from approximately december to march, the low waters season takes place, and the lakes remain isolated from the caura river. aricagua has an area of 5.7 km2 and paramuto of 2 km2. the littoral mesohabi- tats of aricagua were represented mainly by beaches covered by leaf litter, and beaches with piles of submerged logs. in paramuto, besides these mesohabitats, beaches of open sand were also frequent. the latter lake also has a greater proportion of gallery forest. in aricagua, due to its easier accessibility, the fisheries seem to be more intensive. we observed a higher number of fishing boats in this lake during our sampling activities, in comparison with paramuto. also, a monitor- ing of the fisheries carried out by wildlife conservation society from 2007 to 2009 in the lower caura indicated that aricagua was visited by at least 10 registered fishermen, who used a combination of gill nets and hooks and extracted a monthly average of 128.4 kg of fish, while there were not registered fishermen who were reported fishing in paramuto. 2.2 | samplings fishes were collected by daytime seining (4 × 1.5 m, 0.5 cm mesh) from 2008 to 2009 covering the four seasons of a hydrologi- cal cycle: high waters in august, falling waters in november, low waters in february and rising waters in may. during each season, 13 sites were sampled in each lake. sampling sites were chosen if they had at least 10 m through which the seine could be hauled. figure 1 location of the floodplain lakes aricagua and paramuto in the lower caura river ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n at each site, the seine was hauled three times through an approxi- mate distance of ten metres. in aricagua, the average distance be- tween sites was of 2.24 km (range 0.12–5.76 km), and in paramuto, 1.09 km (0.6–2.15 km). the smaller distances between sites in paramuto were a result of its smaller size, as noted above. the habitats were characterized by a visual inspection, according to the area covered by each type of substrate (>50%). the types of meso- habitats sampled are indicated in table 1. in aricagua, 43 samples came from shores with substrates covered by leaf litter and nine came from substrates covered with submerged logs. in paramuto, 16 samples came from substrates covered by leaf litter, 42 came from substrates dominated by sand, and six came from substrates covered with submerged logs. it was not possible to carry out the same sampling effort for the three mesohabitat types due to their uneven frequency in the two lakes. during each season, four physical and chemical water variables were obtained through measurements with an ysi multiparametric probe: dissolved oxygen, water temperature, ph and total dissolved solids and two other with a measuring tape and a secchi disc: water depth and transparency. the types of mesohabitats sampled are presented in table 1. all collected individuals were fixed in forma- lin at 10%, and later transported to the laboratory of fish ecology of fundación la salle de ciencias naturales, campus guayana, where they were identified to the species level when possible, and finally deposited in the ichthyological collection of the estación de investigaciones hidrobiológicas de guayana (cri- edhig) belonging to the fundación la salle de ciencias naturales, campus guayana (catalog numbers: 3794 to 7716). 2.3 | fish traits we followed violle et al. (2007) and chose what we considered are response traits of fishes to the environmental conditions. we selected two traits related to habitat use and movement: standard length and body shape, one representative of resource use (mason, lanoiselée, mouillot, wilson, & argillier, 2008): trophic guild, and one representative to the adaptations to seasonality (winemiller, 1989): life strategy. even though life strategy is in fact a syn- drome of several traits (frimpong & angermeier, 2010), we used it as a global categorical variable to simplify the presentation of the results. the species life strategies were assigned according to winemiller (1989) and taphorn (1992). the other traits were as- signed for each species based on measurements with a calliper, field observations, the literature available (echevarría, gonzalez, & mass, 2011; gonzález & vispo, 2004; lasso, 2004; lasso, señaris, lasso- alcalá, & castroviejo, 1995) and information from the data- base of fishbase (froese & pauly, 2014). we used the same crite- ria of classification for the carnivore guilds as rodríguez and lewis (1997), distinguishing between those species visually oriented and those sensory oriented. the categories of each trait can be seen in table 1. the standard length categories correspond to the meas- ured average length of the species as adults or that reported in the literature.     |  161 table 1 environmental variables and fish species traits used to characterize the lakes and the species with their respective codes variable category code habitats: two floodplain lakes mesohabitats: dissolved oxygen total dissolved solids temperature ph hydrological phase: trait standard length life strategy trophic guild body shape a p aricagua paramuto substrate covered with leaf litter m1 m2 substrate of open sand substrate covered by submerged m3 logs mg l−1 ppm °c log high waters falling waters low waters rising waters od std temp°c ph hw fw lw rw attribute 0–10 cm 10.1–20 cm 20.1–30 cm 30.1–40 cm 40.1–50 cm 50.1–60 cm opportunistic seasonal equilibrium planktivore carnivore visually oriented carnivore sensory oriented detritivore herbivore insectivore omnivore serpentiform fusiform slightly deep deep depressed head, cylindrical body flat humped code l1 l2 l3 l4 l5 l6 st1 st2 st3 tg1 tg2a tg2b tg3 tg4 tg5 tg6 sh1 sh2 sh3 sh4 sh5 sh6 sh7 2.4 | statistical analyses initially, a jaccard distance matrix based on the species traits was cre- ated. with this matrix, we built a cluster using the ward’s method. from this cluster, we calculated the alpha species (sd) and trait di- versity (td) of the fish communities for each lake, mesohabitat types within lakes and hydrological seasons with the estimators proposed 162  |     by cardoso, rigal, borges, and carvalho (2014). these estimators have the advantage that they take into account the completeness of the samplings. the calculations of alpha diversities were based on abundance data and posteriorly were rarefied to 1,000 individuals to carry out comparisons between lakes as well as among hydrological seasons and among habitats. the reliability of the estimates of alpha diversity was assessed based on accumulation curves from the abun- dance data and 100 random permutations. the estimator used for the computations of the alpha species diversity curves was chao2. the alpha functional diversity accumulation curves were based on the completeness of the samplings. the species and functional beta diversity and its components: total beta diversity, beta diversity ex- plained by replacement of species and that explained by species gain/loss (cardoso, rigal, carvalho et al., 2014), were also calculated. accumulation curves between the fish communities of aricagua and paramuto were computed to test the reliability of the beta diver- sity values according to sampling intensity, based on abundances. the bat package (cardoso, rigal, & carvalho, 2014) for r (r core development team 2012) was used to calculate both alpha and beta taxonomic and functional diversities. an rlq analysis was conducted to identify the relationships be- tween environmental variables and traits and to obtain an ordination of the species by their traits. this analysis measures the double inertia in two sets, r and q, with a link expressed by their relations with l, where r represents a matrix of sites per environmental variables, q represents a matrix of species per traits, and l is a matrix of species per sites (dolédec, chessel, terbraak, & champely, 1996). the first or- dination in the rlq analysis, of sites according to species, consisted of a correspondence analysis, and those of species per traits and sites per environmental variables were of the hill–smith type, as the data sets contained categorical and numerical parameters (dray et al., 2014). the environmental variables and species traits used in the analyses are listed in table 1. a fourth- corner analysis was carried out, following the proto- col suggested by dray et al. (2014) with the data of aricagua and paramuto combined, and two with the data of each lake separately. this method was used to evaluate the relationships between each en- vironmental variable and each trait. first, we tested the significance of the link between l and r under the model 2 of the protocol, and then, we tested the significance of the link between l and q under the model 4. the multivariate statistic slrq was chosen as the mea- sure of the link between variables due to the presence of quantita- tive and qualitative variables in the matrices r and q respectively (dray & legendre, 2008). next, the significance between r and q was tested with a monte carlo permutation test based on 10.000 random permutations on both data sets. the rlq and fourth- corner analyses were conducted using ade4 (dray & dufour, 2007) for r (r core development team 2012). the permutation model consisted of a combination of models 2 and 4 of dray et al. (2014). this combination involves a permutation of rows of matrix r under model 2 and the permutation of rows of matrix q under model 4. the null hypothesis of this combined model is that at least one matrix, r or q, is not linked to matrix l, meaning that the environmental conditions or the traits ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n influence the species distributions, while the alternate hypothesis is that both environment and traits influence the species distributions simultaneously (dray et al., 2014). for the rlq and fourth- corner anal- yses, the matrix l was of species abundances in each site. 3 |  results in aricagua, 33,975 individuals belonging 103 species were collected, and in paramuto, 22,745 individuals of 98 species. the ichthyofauna from airicagua and paramuto combined was composed as follows: the characiformes represented 69%, followed by siluriformes (17%) and perciformes (13%). clupeiformes and cyprinodontiformes rep- resented 6% and 3% respectively, and finally, gymnotiformes only represented 1% of the total number of species. the total observed richness was equal to 114 species. the alpha functional diversity without rarefaction was of 94.38 in aricagua and 99.83 in paramuto. despite the higher species richness in aricagua, the rarefaction anal- ysis indicated that both species (sd) and trait diversities (td) were greater in paramuto (figure 2). there were significant differences between lakes in terms of water depth (p = .0002), water tempera- ture (p = .015) and ph (p = .0005), but not for the other parameters, as indicated by anova tests. paramuto showed higher water depth, temperature and ph. the temporal patterns of both species and trait diversities were different between lakes (table 2, figure 3). the results per habitat type showed that in aricagua and paramuto, the bottoms covered by sub- merged logs showed the lowest diversities. in both lakes, the chao2 estimate reached its asymptote at the very end of the curve; the slopes in both cases were null (figure 3), indicating that the estimate of species diversity was reliable. the completeness estimates reached their asymptotes soon and the slopes were null, also indicating the reliability of these estimates of trait diversity. total beta diversity without rarefaction was 0.988. the dissimi- larity between lakes can be explained mostly by species replacement (βrepl = 0.788). the differences in richness had a smaller contribution to the species beta diversity (βrich = 0.2). trait beta diversity showed a similar pattern, and the total of 0.842 was mostly built from spe- cies replacement (βrepl = 0.612) with a smaller contribution from dif- ferences in richness between lakes (βrich = 0.23). all values of beta species and trait diversities tended to stabilize after 40 samplings (figure 4). sd td α 5 9 5 8 5 7 5 6 aricagua paramuto aricagua paramuto α 5 5 5 4 5 3 figure 2 boxplots of species (sd) and trait (td) alpha diversities of the lakes aricagua and paramuto, based on rarefactions to 1,000 individuals ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n     |  163 table 2 observed and rarefied species and trait diversities within the mesohabitats of the lakes aricagua and paramuto per hydrological season aricagua paramuto species diversity trait diversity species diversity trait diversity observed rarefied observed rarefied observed rarefied observed rarefied hw fw lw rw m1 m2 m3 18.82 37 40.64 32.04 67.17 na 42.8 14.96 32.24 28.74 25.49 42.69 na 27.09 38.14 50.45 56.94 46.5 62 na 55.05 34.84 47.78 49.95 42.8 53.1 na 45.76 32 18.57 30.15 19 29.68 38.88 15 30.04 15.61 28.8 18.66 29.27 38.31 14.65 47 34.95 39.46 43.41 51.27 53.7 32.36 45.61 33.02 39.04 43.41 50.33 53.22 32.28 aricagua sd td paramuto sd td α 5 2 5 1 α 0 4 0 3 hw fw lw rw hw fw lw rw hw fw lw rw td sd td hw fw lw rw sd m1 m3 α 0 5 0 4 0 3 α 0 5 0 4 sd 6 0 . 0 e p o s l 0 5,000 15,000 25,000 individuals 35,000 2 0 . 0 – 0 5,000 5 3 α 5 2 5 1 α 5 4 5 3 5 2 2 o a h c 0 5 0 2 s s e n e t l e p m o c 0 8 0 6 α 5 4 0 3 5 1 m1 m3 m1 m2 m3 2 o a h c 0 7 0 4 0 1 15,000 25,000 individuals 35,000 0 5,000 10,000 20,000 individuals α 5 4 0 3 sd 3 0 . 0 e p o s l 1 0 . 0 – td 2 . 0 e p o s l 1 . 0 – m1 m2 m3 0 5,000 10,000 20,000 individuals 0 5,000 10,000 20,000 individuals td 3 . 0 e p o s l 0 . 0 s s e n e t l e p m o c 0 0 1 0 8 0 6 0 5,000 15,000 25,000 35,000 0 5,000 15,000 25,000 35,000 0 5,000 10,000 20,000 individuals individuals individuals figure 3 boxplots of species (sd) and trait (td) alpha diversities of mesohabitats within each floodplain lake based on rarefactions to 1,000 individuals (two upper rows), accumulation curves for the estimator chao 2 and slopes between consecutive points along the curves (third row) and completeness of the samplings and their slopes (fourth row) in aricagua (left columns) and paramuto (right columns) the cumulative projected inertia obtained through the rlq anal- ysis was 94.21% for the axes one and two combined. for axis one, the eigenvalue was 7.23 with a covariance of 2.7, and for axis two, the values were of 0.73 and 0.85 respectively. the rlq analysis indi- cated that the first axis in the species ordination was associated with differences in size, expressed as standard length, whereas axis two was associated with the trophic group (figure 5a). all body shape at- tributes except the slightly deep (sh3) were positively associated with axis one (figure 5b), and the opportunistic life strategy, the slightly deep body shape, the herbivore and insectivore guilds were negatively 164  |     ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n l a t o t β 6 9 9 . 0 0 9 9 . 0 l a t o t β 0 9 . 0 4 8 . 0 sd 8 . 0 6 . 0 4 . 0 l p e r β 6 . 0 h c i r β 4 . 0 2 . 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 sampling units 0 10 20 30 40 50 sampling units 0 10 20 30 40 50 sampling units td l p e r β 5 . 0 3 . 0 7 . 0 5 . 0 3 . 0 h c i r β 0 10 20 30 40 50 sampling units 0 10 20 30 40 50 sampling units 0 10 20 30 40 50 sampling units figure 4 species (sd) and trait (td) total beta diversities (left), explained by replacement (centre) and by species loss/ gain (right) for aricagua and paramuto combined d e t (a) n e i r o - y r o s n e s i e r o v n r a c p. flavi. s. lima h. platy. c. macro. b. cuvi c. spilu. d = 2 (b) d = 0.2 l4 melan. sp. m. amaz. rivulus spp. m. casi. p. lugu. b. giaco. c. metae m. tern. m. eleot. h. gracilis p. reti. knodus sp. a. hoig. hemig. spp. nanno. spp. moenk. spp. a. inir. a. hong. p. maxi. t. galea. e. humb. a. ucay. sata. sp. s. mapi. a. vult. s. elong. h. eden. p. squamo. t. auri. t. orin. t. vene. a. magoi c. saxa. b. mariae c. orin. d. filam. geoph. sp. a. grand. a. micr. r. affi. lepto. sp. h. mala. p. athe. h. plecos. m. rami. p. cilia. c. incom. h. arg. b. falc. h. steind. a. bim. h. inm. h. uni. l. orto. l. puncta. m. egre. a. chim. l. orin. a. albom. p. riva. rine. sp. p. brachi. p. blochii p. cari. l. cata. lori. sp. l. brunneus a. amb. h. amm. peko. sp. a. long. h. ores. s. arge. s. pupula pl. costa. aeq. sp. hypopht. mar. c. gibbus s. irrit. p. calm. a. lep. a. man. a. guian. a. per. hemiodus grac. eigenvalues r. apur. r. vulpi. h. arma. decreasing size increasing size st1 tg5 sh3 l1 tg2b sh4 tg4 tg6 sh6 tg2a tg3 st2 l2 sh7 l6 sh1 l5 l3 sh5 sh2 st3 tg1 (c) tds depth d = 0.2 fw rw temp.º.c hw m3 m1 paramuto m2 aricagua ph od trans lw d = 1 pfw4 pfw3 pfw9 pfw11 pfw6 pfw7 pfw13 pfw10 prw13 prw12 phw12 pfw2 pfw5 pfw8 pfw12 prw1 prw2 phw2 phw10 phw4 phw8 phw6 phw7 phw11 prw3 prw5 prw10 prw11 prw4 prw7 prw8 prw9 prw6 phw3 phw4 phw1 phw2 phw7 phw1 phw6 phw9 phw5 phw13 e r o v i t k n a p l s r e t a w g n i l l a f t s r e a w h g h  i t s r e a w w o l (d) afw11 afw12 afw9 afw8 afw6 afw2 afw13 afw3 afw7 afw1 afw10 afw4 afw5 arw6 arw9 arw7 ahw13 ahw12 arw8 ahw10 arw5 ahw11 ahw2 ahw3 arw1 ahw9 ahw8 ahw1 ahw6 arw3 arw4 arw13 arw2 arw10 arw11 ahw7 ahw5 ahw4 arw12 alw10 alw2 alw7 alw1 alw6 alw5 alw4 alw9 alw11 alw3 alw12 alw8 plw11 plw2 plw12 plw5 plw3 plw8 plw1 plw10 plw4 plw6 plw9 plw7 figure 5 rlq analysis results for aricagua and paramuto combined: (a) ordination of species by traits weighted by species abundance per site, (b) variances and relations among traits, (c) variances and relations among environmental parameters and (d) ordination of sites according to environmental parameters weighted by species abundance per site aricagua paramuto associated with axis one and positively associated with the axis two. the water temperature and the seasons of raising (rw) and high waters (hw) were negatively associated to axis one and positively associated to axis two (figure 5c). the low waters season (lw), the water ph and transparency were positively related to axis one and negatively related to axis two. the ordination of the sampling sites was ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n according to the lake in the axis one and the hydrological season in axis two (figure 5d). in paramuto, the sites sampled during low waters were associated with lower values of transparency and high values of ph. in aricagua, the sites sampled during low waters were associated with higher values of dissolved oxygen, whereas the other sites were related to higher values of water temperature. as a general pattern, the analysis indicated that paramuto was associated with bigger sizes, contrarily to aricagua. the carnivores were associated to the falling waters season. this analysis also pointed out to an association of the opportunistic strategy with the water temperature and total dissolved solids. according the fourth- corner analysis for the data of both lakes together, the links between the species and the environmental vari- ables and between the species and their traits were highly significant (p < .001) in both cases. the relationship between the environmental variables and the species traits, evaluated with the monte carlo permu- tation test, was also highly significant. we observed 21 pairwise posi- tive environment–trait associations and 21 negative (figure 6). there were contrasting trends in the trait–environment associations respect- ing the lakes, as all those traits positively associated with aricagua were negatively associated with paramuto and vice versa. the latter was negatively related to the smallest sizes (p < .001) confirming the rlq results, and positively associated to l5 but not to l6. aricagua, on the other hand, was negatively related to bigger sizes (p < .001 for l4 and p < .05 for l5), the seasonal strategy (p < .01), the carnivore trophic guild (p < .001) and the flat body shape (p < .001). this anal- ysis, like the rlq, showed an association between the opportunistic     |  165 strategy with the water ph and total dissolved solids. this strategy was positively associated to the high waters season only in paramuto. only five significant associations were observed in aricagua. none of them were consistent with those observed in paramuto. the as- sociations between environmental conditions and body shapes were lost in the separate analyses. conversely, the associations between mesohabitats and fish traits were lost in the combined analysis. no direct significant associations between the carnivore guilds with water transparency or depth were observed, although the sensory- oriented carnivore guild was positively associated with paramuto, the deeper lake. besides, no association between the bigger sizes and the high water phase was observed. 4 |  discussion trait- based studies can provide useful information about the variables that intervene in the assembly of biotic communities. most trait- based studies of freshwater fish communities have focused on the patterns of longitudinal zonation of functional diversity and on identifying the spatial and environmental variables that act upon the trait structure of communities at different scales (cardoso, rigal, borges et al., 2014; carvalho & tejerina- garro, 2014, 2015; pease et al., 2012, 2015; strecker et al., 2011). however, there is still much to explore about the local determinants of trait structure in freshwater fish communi- ties. in fact, the environmental conditions at this scale can be more important than those at broader scales (terra, hughes, & araújo, p s n a r t h t p e d d o s d t c º . p m e t h p a u g a c i r a o t u m a r a p 1 m 2 m 3 m w h w f w l w r h t p e d p s n a r t d o c º . p m e t s d t h p 1 m 3 m w h w f w l w r h t p e d p s n a r t s d t d o c º . p m e t h p 1 m 2 m 3 m w h w f w l w r l1 l2 l3 l4 l5 l6 st1 st2 st3 tg1 tg2a tg2b tg3 tg4 tg5 tg6 sh1 sh2 sh3 sh4 sh5 sh6 sh7 aricagua and paramuto combined aricagua paramuto figure 6 pairwise relationships between fish species traits and limnological variables, floodplain lakes and mesohabitats established through the fourth- corner analyses for aricagua and paramuto combined (left), aricagua (centre) and paramuto (right). black cells indicate positive relationships, grey cells, negative ones, and white cells, random relationships. names of variables and traits explained in table 1 166  |     2016). at the same time, little information has been available about the spatiotemporal patterns of trait structure in fish communities of floodplains in general. our results pointed towards differences in trait diversity between lakes as well as variations across hydrological sea- sons in both species and trait diversities within each lake, as indicated by the diversity indices. however, we are aware that there were cer- tain limitations related to the spatial scale of the sampling site, which may not be representative of the home range of several species of fish that were included in the analyses, the results of which therefore might not be representative of the entire species–habitat associations of the fish communities in the lakes. this might be the case particu- larly for the species of bigger sizes. likewise, considering that the samplings were only diurnal, the possibility exists that some species that are part of the communities were not detected, which might blur the trait–habitat associations. in spite of these shortcomings, we con- sider that the results of this study reflect a considerable proportion of the species and trait diversities as well as of the trait–habitat associa- tions in the littorals of aricagua and paramuto, particularly because of the high number of species that were spanned, and that it represents an advance in the knowledge of the community organization in the floodplain lakes of the caura river. contrarily to what we expected, we observed high trait diversity during low waters. we believe this might be partly an artefact of the sampling, as in low waters, the sampling effort was more effective, due to a higher concentration of fishes in less volume of water. we also ob- served higher species and trait diversities in substrates of open sand in the two lakes separately, with respect to the submerged logs that are structurally more complex, contrarily to our last prediction. in other freshwater systems, higher structural complexity of mesohabitats has been associated with the coexistence of species that exhibit differ- ent traits (brind’amour et al., 2011; carvalho & tejerina- garro, 2015; pease et al., 2012). mesohabitats such as submerged logs and masses of aquatic vegetation are structurally more complex than bottoms of open sand or covered by leaf litter; nevertheless, they tend to last less. their shorter duration might not give sufficient time for the fish communities inhabiting them to become saturated (townsend, 1989), which could explain its lower species and trait diversities in compari- son with the other mesohabitats indicated by the sd and td indices. there were noticeable differences in the traits associated with each lake. aricagua was positively associated with very small body sizes, the opportunistic life strategy and insectivore trophic guild. these traits were shared mainly by microcharacids of the genus hemigrammus (hemig. spp), moenkhausia (moenk. spp), microschemobrycon (m. casi) and knodus (knodus sp.). in contrast, paramuto was positively asso- ciated with larger species of mostly carnivore habits, having different body shapes. these differences between lakes would be driven by differences in water depth as predicted, and also in area, tempera- ture and ph, and possibly by differences in anthropogenic pressures between them, as aricagua seems to have more presence of fisher- men in comparison with paramuto. in fact, the combination of traits positively associated with paramuto is present in several species of commercial interest, such as the deep- bodied plagioscion squamo- sissimus (p. squamo.) and colossoma macropomum (c. macro.), or the ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n depressed headed and cylindrical- bodied catfishes hemisorubim platy- rhynchos (h. platy.) and ageneiosus ucayalensis (a. ucay.), the fusiform boulengerella cuvieri (b. cuvi.) or the humped- shaped cynodon gibbus (c. gibbus). these species had very low abundances or were entirely absent from aricagua. conversely, the opportunistic life strategy and small sizes observed in the latter have been related to disturbance caused by deforestation in other aquatic systems (fabrício & casatti, 2012). the higher species and trait diversities in paramuto might also indicate that this lake has better conditions than aricagua. in the lat- ter, the number of artisanal fishermen and ships, particularly during low waters, is very high and the targets are mostly larger piscivorous species, such as pseudoplatystoma spp., cichla spp. plagioscion spp. and hydrolycus spp., which might be facilitating the higher abundances of smaller, prey species in aricagua. the ph was the limnological variable that showed most associations with the species traits, and it also dif- fered significantly between lakes, highlighting its importance for the trait structure of the fish communities in the caura river floodplain. the ph has an important role in determining the abundance of inver- tebrates (jackson & harvey, 1993), which might explain why this pa- rameter had a significant relation with the insectivore guild. besides, the seasonal changes in the ph and temperature of the water, as well as of other parameters, can trigger migratory movements and repro- duction activity in fishes (lowe- mcconnell, 1975), which might may be reflected in the influence of the ph and the temperature in the seasonal and the opportunistic strategies observed in this study. two other limnological variables also had an influence in the trait structure of the fish communities in aricagua and paramuto, although in a lesser degree, the dissolved oxygen and the total dissolved sol- ids. in other aquatic systems, the dissolved oxygen has been pointed out as an important driver of fish trait structure (carvalho & tejerina- garro, 2015; jackson & harvey, 1993). in our study, the fourth- corner analyses indicated that this parameter was only negatively associated with medium sizes (l4), a trait shown by several siluriformes such as sorubim lima, hemisorubim platyrhynchos and ageneiosus magoi. we consider that this is mostly because certain siluriformes can tolerate low levels of dissolved oxygen, in comparison with characiformes (machado- allison, 2005). last, we speculate that the negative associ- ation between the total dissolved solids and the planktivore guild ob- served through the fourth- corner analysis of aricagua and paramuto combined might be an indirect result of the influence of this parameter on the water productivity, as high concentrations of total dissolved sol- ids can reduce productivity in algae (weber- scannell & duffy, 2007). on the other hand, other variables might be intervening in the organization of fish communities at the mesohabitat level within the lakes. the littoral mesohabitats of floodplains are subjected to con- stant assembly and disassembly due to the seasonal variations of the water level. the structure of fish communities in these patches depends on the species habitat selectivity, but is also determined by the mesohabitats age and characteristics, the hydrological period and their location (arrington & winemiller, 2006; arrington et al., 2005). in newly formed patches, certain processes such as colonization are more important, whereas in older ones, the species habitat selection might be influenced by biotic interactions. these two variables could ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n have influenced the mesohabitat–trait associations in paramuto and those observed for the two lakes combined through the fourth- corner analyses. in aricagua, due to its lower water depth, the fluctuations in the water level might have been too drastic to allow for the establish- ment of species–mesohabitat and consequently of trait–mesohabitat associations in permanently reshuffling patches. biotic interactions might have influenced trait–mesohabitat associations in paramuto. for example, the fourth- corner analysis indicated a positive associa- tion between the smallest size (l1) and the substrates of open sand. in other neotropical floodplains, the occupation of shallow, open sand littorals has been explained as a strategy to reduce the chance of pre- dation (arrington & winemiller, 2003). the opportunistic strategy was also associated to this mesohabitat. in other aquatic systems, oppor- tunistic species have been linked to shallow habitats where fluctua- tions in the water level affect greatly the mesohabitats (winemiller & taphorn, 1989). regarding the traits associated with the hydrological seasons, these varied between lakes and between spatial scales. some associa- tions were likely driven by species populations processes deeply syn- chronized with the flood pulses, such as immigration and recruitment during high waters and mortality during low waters (junk et al., 1989; machado- allison, 1990). for instance, as we had predicted, the oppor- tunistic life strategy was positively associated to the high waters sea- son in paramuto. the opportunistic are mainly small species with high population variability that have early maturation, which span contin- ually after disturbance periods, represented by the dry seasons, when high mortality occurs due to piscivory (winemiller, 1989; winemiller & rose 1992). their populations grow rapidly once the environmental conditions and the availability of refuges, food and spawning habitats are available. in fact, the reproductive strategies of many fish species in these floodplains are related to the production of recruits to coin- cide with the rising waters season, when habitat conditions are more favourable and there is a greater possibility for rapid and extensive dispersal (poff & allan, 1995). these species have also evolved adapta- tions to take advantage of the conditions in tropical floodplains during high waters, when the river floods the plain, the aquatic vegetation starts to grow again, and there is a high availability of trophic resources (echevarría & machado- allison, 2014). during high waters, several migratory species such as the frugivorous piaractus brachipomus and colossoma macropomum enter the flooded forests to feed (machado- allison, 2005), thereby the raising waters–herbivore association. we found no significant associations between any of the carnivore guilds with the hydrological seasons, the water transparency or depth through the fourth- corner analyses. we believe this may be partly a result of our small sample sites, with only two lakes, both belonging to the caura river floodplain, which is a black waters river, in con- trast to rodríguez and lewis (1997) who spanned floodplain lakes in the lowlands of apure, mostly of white waters, as well as lakes of the caura river. in that respect, aricagua and paramuto probably did not show enough variability of water transparency across the hydrological cycle to produce any significant carnivore–hydrological season or car- nivore–environment association. hence, our findings suggest that the lake morphometry–transparency–piscivory model might not explain     |  167 local patterns of trait structure of fish communities. on the other hand, these results may also indicate that carnivore species are less dependent on environmental conditions and that other factors such as prey abundances may be key drivers of these trophic guilds. the lack of similar trait–habitat associations between aricagua and paramuto is striking considering the high number of shared spe- cies by these lakes, as well as the fact that they are part of the same floodplain system. this pattern, as well as the lakes disparate species and trait diversities, might be a consequence of their differences in area, water depth, ph and temperature, at the same time reflecting their different shapes and riparian conditions, which create dissimilar habitat templets (southwood, 1977; thorp et al., 2008; townsend & hildrew, 1994) within each lake. therefore, the particular conditions and features of aricagua and paramuto seem to influence the particu- lar trait structure of their fish communities. likewise, the associations also changed when the fish communities of both lakes were analysed together. these results evidence the importance of the spatial hetero- geneity in the organization of fish communities in floodplains and also that the variables that intervene in their organization change along with the spatial scales. again, it is necessary to take into account the small number of lakes spanned in this study, for which the patterns described must be interpreted with care. in this regard, it is possible that the patterns change if more lakes are included. our findings provide an idea of which limnological variables might affect the fish communities’ structure if altered as a result of logging and mining. for example, mining activities specially have been linked to increases in water total dissolved solids, temperature and changes in ph (weber- scannell & duffy, 2007). small- sized, opportunistic in- sectivore species, as well as seasonal species, which are the majority, might be particularly vulnerable to such alterations in the limnologi- cal conditions. in other hydrographic systems, mining and deforesta- tion have been related to losses in both taxonomic and trait diversity (fabrício & casatti, 2012; hitt & chambers, 2014). additionally, the differences in the fish community structure between aricagua and paramuto suggest that the fisheries might be having an impact at a local scale. at this regard, the indiscriminate fishing in floodplain lakes can also exert strong impacts on the fish communities. such impacts might be particularly intense during low water phases. also, conser- vation efforts should focus on protecting the forest cover around paramuto, as it seems to favour the higher fish species and trait di- versity. furthermore, it is indispensable to gather more data about the fisheries in the area. nevertheless, the high species and trait diver- sity in aricagua and paramuto is a stand- alone reason to preserve the floodplain and its fish communities. still, we are aware that the scale of this study was limited and that it is necessary to extend the work to other lakes of the caura floodplain. acknowledgements the authors do not have any conflict of interest to declare. the data from the floodplains aricagua and paramuto were obtained as part of the activities of the program of conservation of the caura river basin leaded by wildlife conservation society. the authors wish to 168  |     thank félix daza and marly medina for their assistance in the field and francis mass for her assistance both in the field and in the laboratory. the authors also wish to thank donald taphorn for his review and insightful comments on the first draft of this manuscript, as well as the anonymous reviewers and editors. references arrington, d., & winemiller k. o. (2003). diel changeover in sand- beach fish assemblages in a neotropical floodplain river. journal of fish biology, 63, 442–459. arrington, d., & winemiller, k. o. (2006). habitat affinity, the seasonal flood pulse, and community assembly in the littoral zone of a neotropical floodplain river. journal of the north american benthological society, 25, 126–141. arrington, d., winemiller, k. o., & layman, c. (2005). community assem- bly at the patch scale in a species rich tropical river. oecologia, 144, 157–167. brind’amour, a., boisclair, d., dray, s., & legendre, p. (2011). relationships between species feeding traits and environmental conditions in fish communities: a three- matrix approach. ecological applications, 21, 363–377. cardoso, p., rigal, f., borges, p. v., & carvalho, j. c. (2014). a new frontier in biodiversity inventory: a proposal for estimators of phylogenetic and functional diversity. methods in ecology and evolution, 5, 452–461. cardoso, p., rigal, f., & carvalho, j. c. (2014). bat – biodiversity assessment tools, an r package for the measurement and estimation of alpha and beta taxon, phylogenetic and functional diversity. methods in ecology and evolution, 6, 232–236. cardoso, p., rigal, f., carvalho, j. c., fortelius, m., borges, p., podani, j., & schmera, d. (2014). partitioning taxon, phylogenetic and functional beta diversity into replacement and richness difference components. journal of biogeography, 41, 749–761. carvalho, r. a., & tejerina-garro, f. l. (2014). environmental and spatial processes: what controls the functional structure of fish assemblages in tropical rivers and headwater streams? ecology of freshwater fish, 24, 317–328. carvalho, r. a., & tejerina-garro, f. l. (2015). the influence of environmen- tal variables on the functional structure of headwater stream fish as- semblages: a study of two tropical basins in central brazil. neotropical ichthyology, 13, 349–360. chernoff, b., machado-allison, a., riseng, k., & montanbault, j. (eds.) (2003). a biological assessment of the aquatic ecosystems of the caura river basin, bolívar state, venezuela – rap bulletin of biological assess- ment. washington, dc: conservation international center for applied biodiversity science department of conservation biology, 285 pp. dolédec, s., chessel, d., terbraak, c., & champely, s. (1996). matching species traits to environmental variables: a new three- table ordination method. environmental and ecological statistics, 3, 143–166. dray, s., choler, p., dolédec, s., peres-neto, p. r., thuiller, w., pavoine, s., & ter braak, c. j. f. (2014). combining the fourth- corner and the rlq methods for assessing trait responses to environmental variation. ecology, 95, 14–21. dray, s., & dufour, a. (2007). the ade4 package: implementing the duality diagram for ecologists. journal of statistical software, 22, 1–20. dray, s., & legendre, p. (2008). testing the species traits- environment relationships: the fourth- corner problem revisited. ecology, 89, 3400–3412. echevarría, g., gonzalez, n., & mass, f. (2011). aspectos reproductivos de la comunidad de peces de la cuenca alta del río caura, venezuela. ciencia, 19, 25–40. echevarría, g., & machado-allison, a. (2014). comunidades de peces en planicies de inundación de ríos tropicales : factores que intervienen en ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n su estructura. boletín de la academia de las ciencias físicas, matemáticas y naturales de venezuela, lxxiv, 35–67. fabrício, t., & casatti, l. (2012). influence of forest cover and mesohab- itat types on functional and species diversity of fish communities in neotropical lowland streams. ecology of freshwater fish, 21, 433–442. frimpong, e. a., & angermeier, p. l. (2010). trait- based approaches in the analysis of stream fish communities. american fisheries society symposium, 73, 109–136. froese, r., & pauly, d. (2014). fishbase. retrieved from: http://www.fish- base.org gonzález, n., & vispo, c. (2004). ecología trófica de algunos peces impor- tantes en lagunas de inundación del bajo río caura, estado bolívar, venezuela. memoria de la fundación la salle de ciencias naturales, 2003, 147–183. gonzález, n., echevarría, g., daza, f., & mass, f. (2012). list illustrated list of additions to the ichthyofauna of the caura river, venezuela. check list, 8, 43–52. hitt, n. p., & chambers, d. b. (2014). temporal changes in taxonomic and functional diversity of fish assemblages downstream from mountaintop mining. freshwater science, 33, 915–926. jackson, d., & harvey, h. (1993). fish and invertebrates: community – environment relationships. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 50, 2641–2651. junk, w. j., bayley, p. b., & sparks, r. e. (1989). the flood pulse concept in river-floodplain systems. canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 106, 110–127. keddy, p. (1992). assembly and response rules: two goals for predictive community ecology. journal of vegetation science, 3, 157–164. lasso, c. (2004). los peces de la estación biológica el frío y caño guaritico (estado apure), llanos del orinoco, venezuela. unesco, 5, 458 pp. lasso, c. a., señaris, c., lasso-alcalá, o., & castroviejo, j. (1995). aspectos ecológicos de una comunidad de bagres (pisces: siluroidei) en los llanos inundables de venezuela. acta biológica venezueleica, 16, 1–31. lowe-mcconnell, r. h. (1975). fish communities in tropical freshwaters. their distribution, ecology and evolution. new york, ny: longman inc, 337 pp. machado-allison, a. (1990). ecología de los peces de las áreas inundables de los llanos de venezuela. interciencia, 15, 411–423. machado-allison, a. (2005). los peces de los llanos de venezuela: un ensayo sobre su historia natural, segunda ed. caracas: consejo de desarrollo científico y humanístico, universidad central de venezuela, 144 pp. mason, n. w., lanoiselée, c., mouillot, d., wilson, b., & argillier, c. (2008). does niche overlap control relative abundance in french lacustrine fish communities? a new method incorporating functional traits. journal of animal ecology, 77, 661–669. mcgill, b. j., enquist, b. j., weiher, e., & westoby, m. (2006). rebuilding community ecology from functional traits. trends in ecology and evolution, 21, 178–185. mlambo, m. c. (2014). not all traits are “functional”: insights from taxon- omy and biodiversity- ecosystem functioning research. biodiversity and conservation, 23, 781–790. montaña, c. g., layman, c. a., & winemiller, k. o. (2011). gape size influ- ences seasonal patterns of piscivore diets in three neotropical rivers. neotropical ichthyology, 9, 647–655. montaña, c. g., & winemiller, k. o. (2010). local- scale habitat influences morphological diversity of species assemblages of cichlid fishes in a tropical floodplain river. ecology of freshwater fish, 19, 216–227. pease, a. a., gonzález-díaz, a. a., rodiles-hernández, r., & winemiller, k. o. (2012). functional diversity and trait- environment relationships of stream fish assemblages in a large tropical catchment. freshwater biology, 57, 1060–1075. pease, a. a., taylor, j. m., winemiller, k. o., & king, r. s. (2015). ecoregional, catchment, and reach- scale environmental factors shape functional- trait structure of stream fish assemblages. hydrobiologia, 753, 265–283. ﻿ec﻿evaarv vand ﻿ganzá﻿n poff, n. (1997). landscape filters and species traits: towards mechanistic understanding and prediction in stream ecology. journal of the north american benthological society, 16, 391–409. poff, n. l., & allan, j. d. (1995). functional organization of stream fish as- semblages in relation to hydrologic variability. ecology, 76, 606–627. pool, t. k., olden, j. d., whittier, j. b., & paukert, c. p. (2010). environmental drivers of fish functional diversity and composition in the lower colorado river. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 67, 1791–1807. r core development team (2012). r: a language and environment for statisti- cal computing. vienna, austria: r foundation for statistical computing. rodríguez, m., & lewis, w. (1997). structure of fish assemblages along en- vironmental gradients in floodplain lakes of the orinoco river. ecological monographs, 67, 109–128. rondón suárez, y., júnior, m. p., & catella, a. c. (2004). factors regulat- ing diversity and abundance of fish communities in pantanal lagoons, brazil. fisheries management and ecology, 11, 45–50. scarabotti, p., lópez, j., & pouilly, m. (2011). flood pulse and the dynamics of fish assemblage structure from neotropical floodplain lakes. ecology of freshwater fish, 20, 605–618. southwood, t. (1977). habitat, the templet for ecological strategies? journal of animal ecology, 46, 336–365. strecker, a. l., casselman, j. m., fortin, m. j., jackson, d., ridgway, m., abrams, p. a., & shuter, b. (2011). a multi- scale comparison of trait linkages to environmental and spatial variables in fish communities across a large freshwater lake. oecologia, 166, 819–831. taphorn, d. (1992). the characiform fishes of the apure river drainage. biollania, 4, 537 pp. terra, b. d. f., hughes, r. m., & araújo, f. g. (2016). fish assemblages in atlantic forest streams: the relative influence of local and catch- ment environments on taxonomic and functional species. ecology of freshwater fish, 25, 527–544. thorp, j., thoms, m., & delong, m. (2008). the riverine ecosystem synthesis. london, uk: elsevier, 233 pp. townsend, c. (1989). the patch dynamics concept of stream community ecology. journal of the north american benthological society, 8, 36–50.     |  169 townsend, c., & hildrew, a. (1994). species traits in relation to a habitat templet for river systems. freshwater biology, 31, 265–275. violle, c., navas, m. l., vile, d., kazakou, e., fortunel, c., hummel, i., & garnier, e. (2007). let the concept of trait be functional!. oikos, 116, 882–892. weber-scannell, p. k., & duffy, l. k. (2007). effects of total dissolved solids on aquatic organisms: a review of literature and recommendation for salmonid species. american journal of environmental sciences, 3, 1–6. winemiller, k. o. (1989). patterns of variation in life history among south american fishes in seasonal environments. oecologia, 81, 225–241. winemiller, k. o. (1996). dynamic diversity in fish assemblages of tropical rivers. in m. l. cody, & j. a. smallwood (eds.), long-term studies of verte- brate communities (pp. 99–134). san diego, california: academic press. winemiller, k. o., & rose, k. a. (1992). patterns of life-history diversifi- cation in north american fishes: implications for population regula- tion patterns of life-history diversification in north american fishes: implications for population regulation. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic, 49, 2196–2218. winemiller, k. o., & taphorn, d. c. (1989). la evolución de las estrategias de vida en los peces de los llanos occidentales de venezuela. biollania, 6, 77–122. supporting information additional supporting information may be found online in the support- ing information tab for this article. how to cite this article: echevarría g and gonzález n. fish trait diversity in littorals of two floodplain lakes of the highly biodiverse caura river, venezuela. ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:158–169. https://doi.org/10.1111/eff.12333  