ecology of freshwater fish 2002: 11: 251–259 printed in denmark  all rights reserved copyright # blackwell munksgaard 2002 effects of kinship on growth and movements of brown_trout in ﬁeld enclosures greenberg la, hernna¨ s b, bro¨ nmark c, dahl j, eklo¨ v a, olse´ n kh. effects of kinship on growth and movements of brown_trout in ﬁeld enclosures. ecology of freshwater fish 2002: 11: 251–259. # blackwell munksgaard, 2002 abstract – the effect of kinship on growth and use of space by individually pit-tagged 1þ brown_trout was studied for 11 weeks in eight stream enclosures. each enclosure consisted of two sections, separated by a region containing pit-detecting antennae, which enabled us to measure use of sections by all individuals. two types of sibling groups were tested, a single sibling group, f1, consisting of four individuals that were reared together in hatchery tank ‘a’ (f1a) plus four additional siblings of the same family but raised in hatchery tank ‘b’ (f1b), and a mixed sibling group, consisting of four f1a individuals plus four siblings from a second family, f2. based on kin theory and earlier laboratory studies, we expected that growth of the f1a individuals in the single sibling group to be greater than that of f1a individuals in the mixed family sibling group, but instead we found just the opposite. the variance of growth did not differ between treatments. nor was there a difference in time f1a individuals spent together when they were in mixed versus single sibling groups. we did find that f1a individuals changed habitat more frequently than f2 individuals in the mixed sibling group but less frequently than f1b in the single sibling groups. thus, our predictions based on kin theory for growth and behavior of brown_trout were not supported by our data, and we suggest that the role of kin recognition for the ecology of salmonids deserves further attention. l. a. greenberg1,, b. hernna« s1, c. bro« nmark1, j. dahl1, a. eklo« v1, k. h. olse¤ n2 1department of ecology, lund university, s-223 62, lund, sweden, 2university college so« derto« rn, department of natural sciences, box 4101, s-141 04, huddinge, sweden present address: department of biology, karlstad university, s-65188 karlstad, sweden; tel.: þ46 54 7001543; fax: þ46 54 7001462; e-mail: larry.greenberg@kau.se key words: kin selection; sibling competition; hatchery; stream; heterogeneous advantage; salmonid; passive integrated transponder larry a. greenberg, department of ecology, lund university, s-223 62, lund, sweden accepted for publication june 12, 2002 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´ s del texto principal de este artı´ culo. introduction according to kin selection theory, an individual can increase its inclusive ﬁtness and thereby increase its genes’ probability of survival by behaving differently to kin versus nonkin indivi- duals (hamilton 1964). for example, individuals can increase inclusive ﬁtness by being less aggres- sive to kin than to nonkin. in addition, individuals in kin groups may help each other so that they have more time available for foraging and pre- dator vigilance than individuals in groups with mixed kinship. as a result, growth and survival should improve, which has direct implications for ﬁtness. it has been shown in laboratory studies that several species of salmonids differentiate between kin and nonkin by odor (quinn & busack 1985; olse´ n 1989; winberg & olse´ n 1992; brown et al. 1993). moreover, studies have reported that sib- lings prefer to occupy territories near other sib- lings, that siblings share territories more than nonkin and that there is a lower frequency of aggressive acts made by individuals in pure sibling (individuals from one family) groups than in mixed sibling (individuals from at two families) groups (brown & brown 1993a, b; olse´ n et al. 1996; olse´ n & ja¨ rvi 1997; grifﬁths & arm- strong 2002). this reduction in aggressiveness should reduce costs associated with feeding, lead- ing to improved growth opportunities. several studies have reported faster growth or higher rna levels as well as reduced variation in growth among individuals in pure sibling groups than in least 251 greenberg et al. mixed sibling groups (brown & brown 1996; brown et al. 1996; olse´ n & ja¨ rvi 1997). kin selection is not the only process that may be operating among closely related individuals. high levels of genetic similarity among neighboring individuals may also lead to sibling competition, which in turn should lead to a decreased associa- tion between kin. this is because kin are expected to have similar ecological needs and thus exploit resources more similarly than genetically hetero- geneous (grifﬁths & armstrong 2001). individuals to date, nearly all studies of kinship in salmo- nids have been conducted in the laboratory, and the studies are often of relatively short duration. the relevance of sibling recognition under more complex ﬁeld conditions has only been addressed by two studies (quinn et al. 1994; grifﬁths & armstrong 2001). consequently, we examined growth and use of space by single sibling (one family) and mixed sibling (two families) groups of brown_trout in enclosed areas of a near-natural outdoor stream channel. we hypothesized that individuals in single sibling groups would grow faster than individuals in mixed sibling groups. moreover, we predicted that familiar siblings from the same family when together with indivi- duals from an unfamiliar second family would spend more time together than they would when together with additional unfamiliar individuals from the same family. this prediction is based on previous laboratory studies that have shown that siblings prefer to occupy territories near other siblings (and are less aggressive to each other) and that familiarity in rearing conditions is not likely to confound kinship effects (winberg & olse´ n 1992; brown & brown 1993a, b, 1996; olse´ n et al. 1996; olse´ n & ja¨ rvi 1997). measuring the amount of time spent together was accom- plished using a ﬂat-bed passive integrated trans- ponder (pit) system, which offers the possibility of both individual marking and the collection of detailed real-time activity and habitat use data for each individual ﬁsh (armstrong et al. 1996; greenberg & giller 2000). this system simply requires that ﬁsh swim over an antenna placed on the stream bottom. materials and methods study site and equipment the study was conducted in eight approximately 8 m 3 m enclosures (described in greenberg & dahl 1998), situated in a 210-m long channel (fig. 1, upper drawing). each area was enclosed using grided metal walls that permitted water ﬂow 252 but retained ﬁsh. the channel receives water from sna¨ llero¨ dsa˚ n creek, a forested stream loca- ted in torraro¨ d, southern sweden (568101800n, 138 250000e). each enclosure consisted of two sections, both of which were covered by about 70–80% ﬁne material (mostly mud, sand and gravel; par- ticles <128 mm diameter) and 20–30% coarse material (128–384 mm diameter). water depth was generally 20–40 cm. mean water velocity (at 0.6 depth) was mostly <10 cm/s (>80% of en- closure area). the pitsystem tag code, antenna number, and time and date of detection were recorded when a ﬁsh crossed an antenna. antennae were placed pairwise at the junction of two sections to determine the direction of ﬁsh movements, based on the order in actual time at which each antenna was crossed. as a consequence of the short vertical detection dis- tance of the antenna (about 20 cm), a shallow transition zone was created between the two sec- tions (fig. 1, lower drawing) by constructing a platform in the middle of the enclosure. all trout were forced to cross the antenna when moving between sections by securing a net to each corner of the platform and extending it diagonally to the shore. two corridors were created across the platform, using bricks to ensure that ﬁsh moved over the most sensitive regions of the antennae (fig. 1). given the large number of section changes recorded (see results), the transition zone did not appear to interfere with ﬁsh move- ments. the entire enclosure was covered by a 2-cm mesh netting to protect trout from predatory mammals and birds. for more information about the pit system, see greenberg & giller (2000, 2001). our system is similar to that described by armstrong et al. (1996), and in their set-up, the overall detection efﬁciency was >99%. experimental design the ﬁsh used in this experiment came from the fishery research station of the swedish national board of fisheries in ka¨ larne, sweden. trout from two different families, f1 and f2, both with one wild parent and one hatchery-reared parent, were used. the initial mean length of these 1þ ﬁsh was 147.3 mm (sd¼ 3.1 mm) (range 141–153 mm), and only fully ﬁnned ﬁsh were used. two treat- ments were tested: (1) a sibling group from one family consisting of a group of four siblings from rearing tank ‘a’ (f1a) together with four other siblings of the same family but from rearing tank ‘b’ (f1b) and (2) a mixed sibling group consisting effects of kinship on growth and movements of brown_trout fig. 1. upper panel: schematic diagram showing the layout of the nine enclosures, eight of which were used for this study, in the 210 m long stream channel. single sibling groups were stocked in enclosures 1, 3, 6 and 8 and the mixed sibling groups were stocked into enclosures 2, 4, 7 and 9. lower panel: the set-up for each enclosure (not to scale) shown from above. all equipment was powered by mains electricity. note that antennae (detectors) were placed pairwise at the junction of two sections and that the width of the enclosure was constricted here using nets to force all trout to swim over the antennae when moving between sections. of four f1a individuals plus four individuals from a second family, reared in tank ‘c’ (hereafter referred to as f2, without the tank notation). because the study focuses on the response of f1a individuals, which are used in both treat- ments, this group of individuals is referred to as the focal group. the other two groups of ﬁsh, f1b and f2, are referred to as nonfocal groups. family f2 was held separate from family f1 since ferti- lization, whereas family f1 was separated into two tanks (f1a and f1b) on 22 january 1996 and held separately for 6 months before being stocked into the enclosures. all equipment, containers, etc. were rinsed with 95% alcohol and tap water prior to and after use with any group to prevent contact. the three groups were held separately to ensure that each group of ﬁsh had four individuals that were familiar with each other and four indi- viduals that were less familiar and either from the same family or from a different family. with this design, we have tried to separate the effect of kinship from the effect of familiarity. neverthe- less, f1a and f1b individuals were not completely unfamiliar with each other. we do not believe this to be a problem as familiarity is not necessary for kin discrimination to occur in salmonids, and thus familiarity in rearing conditions is not likely a (winberg & olse´ n 1992; confounding effect brown & brown 1996). moreover, familiarity effects break down under high densities (grifﬁths & magurran 1997), and densities were high at the ka¨ larne hatchery. trout were held for a few days in 600 l aquaria prior to insertion of pit tags. the tags, which measured 11 mm 2 mm, were injected into the body cavity after anesthetizing the ﬁsh with tri- cain methane-sulphonate (ms-222). following a period of several days in lightly salted aquarium water (to prevent infections), the trout were stocked into the enclosures on 28 june 1996. the density of about 0.33 trout/m2 was well within the range of natural densities reported for southern sweden (eklo¨ v et al. 1999), and in a previous experiment in the same enclosures with this density, most ﬁsh had positive growth rates (greenberg & dahl 1998). the treatments were assigned to the enclosures in an alternat- ing fashion (enclosure 1: single sibling group; 253 greenberg et al. enclosure 2: mixed sibling group; enclosure 3: single sibling group, etc.). during the course of the experiment, two ﬁsh escaped from one enclo- sure, one died from electroﬁshing and one lost its tag, and these four ﬁsh were replaced by tagged ﬁsh of similar size and from the appropriate rearing tank. use of sections by trout was measured in each of the enclosures for two consecutive days on two different occasions, once in the middle of the experiment (18 july 6 august) and once at the end (17 august 1 september). section use could only be measured in two enclosures (one for each treatment) at a time as only four antennae were available. this meant that we had to move the antennae between enclosures. in theory, it should have taken 8 days to measure section use in all enclosures but lost data due to technical problems required us to redo some enclosures. trout were captured by electroﬁshing, two enclosures at a time, directly following measurements of section use. on two occasions, use of sections was con- ducted shortly after electroﬁshing as technical problems were discovered afterwards. trout in total, captured ﬁsh were anesthetized using ms-222, identiﬁed to individual using a hand-held pit detector, and measured to the nearest mm and weighed to the nearest 0.1 g. on both sampling occasions, the trout were returned to the enclo- sures after recovery from anesthesia. previous studies have found no effects on trout diet and condition following repeated electroﬁshing and handling of the same individuals (twomey & giller 1990). the experiment was terminated on 15 september when we collected (via electroﬁsh- ing) the trout a third time and measured and weighed all individuals. from each enclosure were sampled by electroﬁshing three times: 21 july 6 august, 19–27 august and 15 september. thus, growth was analyzed for three time periods, from the start of the experiment (28 june) to the ﬁrst electroﬁshing occasion, from the ﬁrst to the sec- ond electroﬁshing occasion and for the entire study period (28 june 15 september). growth comparisons within each of the two shorter per- iods are not entirely fair as the length of growth periods for the different enclosures differed. how- ever, growth over the entire experiment is based on exactly the same time period. air temperature (water temperature data ﬁle was lost) measured at the swedish meteorological and hydrological institute’s station in nearby ho¨ rby averaged 14.3 1.7 8c during the ﬁrst growth period (28 june 29 july, mid-point of electroﬁshing period), 17.1 1.8 8c during the second growth period (29 july 23 august) and 13.2 3.5 8c from the 254 end of the second growth period to the last sam- pling in september (23 august 15 september). temperatures were particularly warm during the second period when 73% of the days in this period had maximum temperatures >20 8c (up to 25.4 8c), compared to only 25% of the days in the second growth period and 33% of the days in the third period. data analysis speciﬁc growth rates were calculated using the equation ln mf   ln mi t where mf is the ﬁnal mass, mi is the initial mass and t is the number of days elapsed between initial and ﬁnal weighings. this was computed for three time periods (ﬁrst period, second period and entire duration of the experiment). the effect of sibling group type (single vs. mixed) on growth of all ﬁsh in each enclosure was tested with two- tailed, one-way anova. further testing was done after separating the ﬁsh into the four differ- ent trout types: f1a from single sibling group, f1b from single sibling group, f1a from mixed sibling group and f2 from mixed sibling group. this was done using repeated measures anova, in which sibling group type (single vs. mixed) was the main factor and trout category (focal vs. nonfocal ﬁsh) in each enclosure was the repeated measure. the following contrast tests were also performed: (1) single f1a versus mixed f1a to test for a kin effect; (2) single f1a versus single f1b to test for an effect of rearing history; and (3) mixed f1a versus mixed f2 to test for differences between families. a total of 263 000 individual movement records were analyzed, and 13 806 of these represented movements between sections. a ‘normal’ passage involved crossing one antenna followed by the other. for example, a movement from the upstream section (over antenna 1) to the downstream sec- tion (over antenna 2) and back again would involve four antenna crossings (e.g. antenna 1, antenna 2, antenna 2, antenna 1). occasionally, an antenna was crossed without any recording from the other antenna (e.g. antenna 1, antenna 2, antenna 1). such recordings are referred to as a ‘missing link’ if the time for the second section crossing exceeded 5 min. approximately 2% of the section changes represented missing links. movement was measured for each individual as the number of passages and ‘missing links’ during the 48-h period. we computed a mean movement rate for each of the two sibling groups in each effects of kinship on growth and movements of brown_trout enclosure. we then analyzed these movement data using repeated measures anova where the two categories of trout (focal and nonfocal) found in each enclosure were treated as the repeated mea- sure and sibling group type (single vs. mixed) the main factor. data were log-transformed to stabi- lize variances. we hypothesized that f1a ﬁsh (focal ﬁsh) would spend more time with each other in the mixed sibling group than in the single sibling group. because use of sections varied greatly between enclosures (section use by all ﬁsh in each enclosure ranged from 21.5 to 75.2% of the time), presum- ably due to differences in the enclosures’ physical environment, we used each enclosure as its own control to calculate the amount of time each focal group spent in the same section. thus, for each enclosure and for each of the two sampling occa- sions, we computed tf   tm where tf is the amount of time (in seconds) per 24-h that the four focal individuals spent together in a section and tm is the mean amount of time any group of four ﬁsh (out of the eight possible ﬁsh found in each enclosure) spent together (in seconds) in a section during a 24-h period. tm is based on 70 possible combinations of selecting four out of eight trout. thus, a positive value means that the focal group spent more time to- gether than expected, whereas a negative value means that the focal group spent less time to- gether than expected. for one enclosure, one of the nonfocal ﬁsh was missing so tm was based on the 35 possible combinations (for selecting four of seven ﬁsh). in addition, one of the enclosures from each time period was not analyzed as 1–2 focal trout (f1a) were missing from the enclosure. the values for the resulting three mixed and four fig. 2. mean specific growth (100) of the different trout types and over different time periods. the six points farthest to the left show growth over the entire experi- ment (28 june to 15 september) for the single (f1a and f1b combined) and mixed (f1a and f2 combined) sibling group and for each trout type (single f1a, single f1b, mixed f1a, mixed f2) separately. the remaining eight points show growth of each trout type for period 1 (28 june to 21 july 6 august) and period 2 (21 july 6 august to 19–27 august). error bars are1 se (for some points, 1 se is less than the height of the point). single sibling groups were then tested using a t- test on log-transformed values. results mean speciﬁc growth over the entire experiment (based on means of all eight individuals in each enclosure) was signiﬁcantly greater in the mixed sibling group than in the pure sibling group (one- way anova: f1,6¼ 6.6, p¼ 0.04, fig. 2). the var- iance of mean speciﬁc growth rate did not differ between the two treatments (one-way anova: f1,6¼ 0.1, p¼ 0.92). dividing the single and mixed sibling groups into the four different trout types (i.e. single f1a, single f1b, mixed f1a, mixed f2) and reanalyzing growth effects over the entire experiment using repeated measures anova revealed an effect of sibling group (f1,6¼ 6.1, p¼ 0.049), but no effect of trout category (focal vs. nonfocal: f1,6¼ 0.2, p¼ 0.89). the sibling group effect was due to trout having higher growth rates in the mixed sibling groups than in the single sibling groups (fig. 2). there was a nonsigniﬁcant an interaction between sibling group and trout category (f1,6¼ 4.8, p¼ 0.07), as focal trout had higher growth rates than nonfocal trout in the mixed sibling group but lower growth rates in the single sibling groups (fig. 2). contrast tests showed that the focal group (f1a) grew faster (p¼ 0.002) when in the mixed group than in the single group (fig. 2). contrast tests also showed that speciﬁc growth rates did not differ between f1a and f1b in the single sibling group (p¼ 0.12), but did differ between f1a and f2 in the mixed group (p¼ 0.025). tendency for examination of speciﬁc growth rates for the two periods revealed higher growth in the ﬁrst period than in the second period (mean of 0.0043 255 greenberg et al. vs. 0.0012 averaged over all treatments). repeated measures anova conducted on the growth data from the ﬁrst period revealed no effect of sibling group (f1,6¼ 0.6, p¼ 0.47) or trout category (f1,6¼ 0.8, p¼ 0.41) but there was an interaction between sibling group and trout category (f1,6¼ 13.4, p¼ 0.01). the interaction was due to the growth rates of focal trout being higher than those of nonfocal trout in the mixed sibling group but lower than nonfocal trout in the single sibling group. there were no signiﬁcant effects during the second period (sibling group: f1,6¼ 1.5, p¼ 0.27; trout category: f1,6¼ 0.3, p¼ 0.58; sibling group -  trout category: f1,6¼ 0.2, p¼ 0.65). thus, the effects on growth based on the entire experiment seem to be largely due to differences observed during the ﬁrst growth period. trout moved between sections primarily during daytime in both periods (fig. 3). the mean num- ber of section changes per hour for the four different trout types ranged from 0.3 to 16.5/h over a 24-h period. repeated measures anova on the number of section changes made per hour-ﬁsh (log-transformed) for each enclosure in which sibling group was the main factor (single vs. mixed sibling group) and focal versus nonfocal group was the repeated measure revealed no effect of sibling group (f1,6¼ 0.006, p¼ 0.94) or the repeated measure (f1,1¼ 1.0, p¼ 0.37) during the ﬁrst period. there was, however, a signiﬁcant interaction between the main factor and the repeated measure (f1,6¼ 18.6, p¼ 0.005). the focal group (f1a) changed section more often than the nonfocal group (f2) in the mixed group, but less often than the nonfocal group in the single sibling group (fig. 3). interestingly, the same gen- eral pattern for this interaction was also observed for the growth data from period 1 (compare figs 2 and 3). that is, f1a trout from the mixed sibling group had the highest mean growth and move- ment rate followed by f1b trout, which in turn had higher growth and movement rates than f2 trout and f1a trout from the single sibling group. in period 2, the relative patterns among the four trout types resembled that observed in period 1, but there were no statistically signiﬁcant differ- ences (repeated measures anova on log-trans- formed data, sibling group type: f1,6¼ 0.002, p¼ 0.97; nonfocal: f1,1¼ 0.049, p¼ 0.83; interaction: f1,6¼ 1.5, p¼ 0.27). focal vs. in the middle of the experiment, the median amount of time that any group of four trout spent together per 24-h period was 4.4 h for the eight enclosures. focal trout in the single sibling group spent a median of 2.3 h more time together than expected, whereas focal trout in the mixed sibling group spent a median of 2.6 h less time together than expected. this difference between focal trout in the single and mixed sibling groups, relative to what was expected by chance, was large but not signiﬁcant (t-test on log-transformed data: t5¼ 2.3, p¼ 0.066). there were no signiﬁcant effects during the second period (t-test on log-trans- formed data: t5¼ 0.03, p¼ 0.98). discussion our predictions, which were based on kin selec- tion theory, were not supported by our growth and behavioral data. trout were predicted to grow faster when in single family groups than when in mixed family groups, but growth was in fact higher in mixed groups. even variation in growth was predicted to be lower in the single family groups than in the mixed family groups, but in this case no difference was found. we had also expected that focal individuals in the mixed sibling groups would spend more time together than when they were in single sibling groups (compared to any random sample of four ﬁsh), but instead, we found no difference. we did, fig. 3. number of section changes/h-fish over a 24-h period for the four different trout types (f1a and f1b in the single sibling group and f1a and f2 in the mixed sibling group) in period 1 (the middle of the experiment) and in period 2 (towards the end of the experiment). data are based on 2 days of observation. 256 effects of kinship on growth and movements of brown_trout however, ﬁnd behavioral differences, even if they were not predicted. focal trout moved between sections more frequently than nonfocal trout in mixed sibling groups, but moved less than non- focal trout in single sibling groups. this difference in the number of section changes did not persist throughout the experiment. given that previous laboratory studies have found higher and less variable growth in kin groups relative to nonkin groups (brown & brown 1996; brown et al. 1996; olse´ n & ja¨ rvi 1997), our lack of corroborating evidence was unexpected. the fact that our study was conducted in a more natural ﬁeld setting may explain these contrasting results. grifﬁths & armstrong (2000) indicated that the laboratory environment may indeed affect beha- vior of salmonids. speciﬁcally, they found similar levels of aggression between kin and nonkin indi- viduals when there was no water recirculation, but that aggression was lower in kin groups than in nonkin groups when water was recirculated. their data indicated that water recirculation increased aggression in dominant ﬁsh towards nonkin subordinates but not towards kin. according to grifﬁths & armstrong (2000), four previous studies of salmonids have had low levels of water replacement (i.e. high recirculation), with 0–47% of the water volume being replaced per hour as compared to 31 200%/h in their experiment. however, olse´ n & ja¨ rvi (1997) had a high water replacement rate (385%/h) and found effects of kinship on social interactions. it seems premature to draw any ﬁrm conclusions about water recir- culation effects, but a recent ﬁeld study of atlantic salmon by grifﬁths & armstrong (2001), in which they found that mixed kin groups had higher population biomass and condition of individual ﬁsh than single kin groups, indicates that results obtained in the laboratory may not be directly transferable to ﬁeld situations. one could argue that our lack of support for kin selection may simply reﬂect high variation in the physical environments of our enclosures as suggested by the variable use of sections among enclosures. but this seems an unlikely explanation as growth did indeed differ between treatments. it simply did not vary as predicted by kin theory; instead the mixed sibling groups grew faster than single sibling groups. we can only speculate on the reason for this, but sibling competition for limited resources is one likely explanation. a heterogeneous advantage (presumably with lower sibling competition as a result) was postulated as the most likely explanation for the higher popula- tion biomass and condition of individual ﬁsh in mixed kin groups than in single kin groups of atlantic salmon (grifﬁths & armstrong 2001). an alternative explanation is that we used an atypical family, and thus our results represent an idiosyncratic outcome. clearly, there were differences in the families as we found, for exam- ple, that f2 individuals changed sections less fre- quently than f1 when together. the only way to address this possibility is to use many families. the study by grifﬁths & armstrong (2001), in which they concluded that the beneﬁts of a het- erogeneous advantage outweighed kin selection, was based on eight families of atlantic salmon. thus, our result does not seem aberrant in light of the results of grifﬁths & armstrong (2001). the duration of previous experiments has var- ied immensely, from as little as a week or two (brown & brown 1993a, 1996; olse´ n & ja¨ rvi 1997) to several months (quinn et al. 1994; brown et al. 1996), with the longest studies lasting 5–7 months (beacham 1989; grifﬁths & armstrong 2002). duration of the experiment probably does not explain why some studies have found support for kin selection and others have not. however, long-term experiments may be needed to capture dynamic processes, especially when conducted under variable ﬁeld conditions. in our experi- ment, we found differences in growth and move- ment rates in period 1 (even a tendency for an effect for use of sections). moreover, we noted that the relative patterns for both growth and movement were similar for the four different types of trout. that is, there was a positive relationship between growth and movement for the trout types. in contrast to period 1, there were no differences in growth and movement rates in period 2. it seems unlikely that the temporal differences in movement rate effects reﬂect adjust- ments by the trout to their new environment as reported by armstrong et al. (1999). this is because there were also growth differences. instead, we believe the temporal differences in movement and growth rates were related to chan- ging environmental conditions in the enclosures during the course of the experiment. maximum air temperatures consistently exceeded 20 8c from 20 july until 30 august (76% of the days). this warm spell more or less coincided with growth period 2 and undoubtedly had negative effects on trout growth as laboratory studies have shown that trout has an upper growth limit of about 19 8c (elliott 1994). the more than threefold higher speciﬁc growth rates in period 1 compared with period 2 probably reﬂect differences in water temperatures between the two periods. thus, increased metabolic costs associated with high temperatures, perhaps in combination with lower food resources, are probably the reason for the lower growth rates in period 2. 257 greenberg et al. all studies of kinship, including our own, have for obvious reasons used artiﬁcially fertilized eggs and raised the ﬁsh in a laboratory environment. if the hatchery environment is important for the development and expression of kin recognition, biased behavior might have been present in this and all previous studies. nevertheless, our study differed from previous laboratory studies in that the type of food as well as the spatial and temporal distribution of food resources was drastically altered when trout were moved from a pellet- delivered hatchery environment to a stream with natural food resources. kin-biased behavior in salmonids as well as in other animals has been suggested to be context dependent (e.g. waldman 1988; blaustein & waldman 1992; brown & brown 1993b; pfenning et al. 1994; temeles 1994). presumably, the stream environment repre- sents a food-poor environment relative to the hatchery environment and as such siblings are forced to compete with each other, which con- trasts with the food-rich hatchery environment, which may promote cooperative behavior among siblings. one way of testing context dependent behavior would be to study the inﬂuence of food availability on kin-biased behavior in trout, which could be done, for example, by comparing trout in fertilized and unfertilized streams. in our study, the diel activity pattern of trout in enclosures seemed to be inﬂuenced by prior hatch- ery conditions. even after nearly 2 months in the ﬁeld, the trout were primarily active during day- light hours. this is in contrast with previous studies of wild-caught trout conducted in our enclosures where the trout were crepuscular and nocturnal (greenberg & giller 2000, 2001). pre- sumably, diurnality is related to daytime feeding regimes in hatcheries and the exclusion of all predators from our enclosures. as all previous studies have also used hatchery-fertilized and/or hatchery-raised ﬁsh, it is difﬁcult to identify how such artiﬁciality might affect the outcome of kin- ship studies. perhaps the approach of grifﬁths & armstrong (2001) should be implemented in future studies to reduce hatchery-bias effects, as they released hatchery-raised ﬁsh into salmon-free tributaries before the fry started feeding exogen- ously. however, one needs to identify potential biases associated with moving ﬁsh from one envir- onment to another. alternatively, one could release eggs directly into rivers. field studies have provided, at best, weak evidence that genetically similar individuals occur closer to each other (i.e. as neighbors) than less related individuals (fontaine & dodson 1999; mjølnerød et al. 1999; garant et al. 2000). on the other hand, many laboratory studies of kin-biased 258 behavior report positive effects, focusing on kin recognition’s role for social interactions and growth. it is, of course, not necessary for the ﬁsh to always be neighbors to accrue beneﬁts from kin (grifﬁths & armstrong 2002). nevertheless, one may ask if kin-biased behavior does not play a role in other aspects of the life history of salmo- nids? it may well be that other forces have lead to the evolution of kin recognition in salmonids. as many salmonids reproduce in the same stream in which they hatch, kin identiﬁcation may function primarily as a way to prevent siblings from spawn- ing with each other (e.g. olse´ n 1999). resumen 1. el efecto de las estrechas relaciones de hermandad entre crecimiento y uso del espacio en truchas de edad 1þ, mar- cadas individualmente con pit-tags, fue estudiado durante 11 semanas en 8 encerramientos. cada uno de estos encer- ramientos consistio´ en dos secciones separadas por una regio´ n que contenı´ a una antena para detectar las pit-tags, lo que nos permitio´ medir el uso de las secciones por todos los individuos. 2. dos tipos de grupos de hermanos fueron analizados: un grupo de hermanos (f1) compusesto por four individuos que fueron mantenidos en un tanque de cria ‘a’ (i.e. f1a) mas four hermanos adicionales de la misma familia que fueron man- tenidos en un tanque de cria ‘b’ (i.e. f1b), y un grupo de hermanos mezclados que consistio´ en four individuos f1a mas four hermanos de una segunda familia f2. 3. basados en la teoria correspondiente y en estudios pre- vios, esperamos que el crecimiento de los individuos f1a del grupo sencillo de hermanos fuera mayor que el de los individuos f1a de la familia mezclada pero encontramos justo lo contrario. la varianza del crecimiento no diﬁrio´ entre tratamientos ni hubo diferencias en el tiempo en el que los individuos f1a pasaron juntos cuando estuvieron en grupos mezclados y sencillos. si encontramos que los individuos f1a cambiaron de habitat mas frecuentemente que los individuos f2 del grupo de hermanos mexclados pero menos frecuentemente que los f1b de grupos sencillos. de esta manera nuestras predicciones para el crecimiento y el comportamiento de truchas no encontraron soporte en los datos. 4. sugerimos que el papel del reconocimiento de herman- dad en la ecologı´ a de salmo´ nidos merece una mayor aten- cio´ n. acknowledgements this study was supported by two separate grants to lag and kho from the swedish research council for forestry and agriculture. we thank the karlsson family for allowing us to work on their property. we thank neil metcalfe and an anonymous reviewer for providing helpful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. references armstrong, j.d., braithwaite, v.a. & rycroft, p. 1996. a flat-bed passive integrated transponder array for mon- itoring behaviour of atlantic salmon parr and other fish. journal of fish biology 48: 539–541. effects of kinship on growth and movements of brown_trout armstrong, j.d., huntingford, f.a. & herbert, n.a. 1999. individual space use strategies of wild juvenile atlantic salmon. journal of fish biology 55: 1201–1212. beacham, t.d. 1989. effect of siblings on growth of juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch). canadian journal of zoology 67: 601–605. blaustein, a.r. & waldman, b. 1992. kin recognition in anuran amphibians. animal behaviour 44: 207–221. brown, g.e. & brown, j.a. 1993a. social dynamics in salmonid fishes: do kin make better neighbours? animal behaviour 45: 863–871. brown, g.e. & brown, j.a. 1993b. do kin always make territory quality. better neighbours? the effects of behavioural ecology and sociobiology 33: 225–231. brown, g.e. & brown, j.a. 1996. does kin-biased increase kin-biased foraging in territorial behaviour juvenile salmonids? behavioural ecology 7: 24–29. brown, g.e., brown, j.a. & crosbie, a.m. 1993. pheno- type matching in juvenile rainbow trout. animal beha- viour 46: 1223–1225. brown, g.e., brown, j.a. & wilson, w.r. 1996. the effects of kinship on the growth of juvenile arctic char. journal of fish biology 48: 313–320. eklo¨ v, a.g., greenberg, l.a., bro¨ nmark, c., larsson, p. & berglund, o. 1999. influence of water quality, habitat and species richness on brown_trout populations. journal of fish biology 54: 33–43. elliott, j.m. 1994. quantitative ecology and the brown_trout. oxford: oxford university press. fontaine, p.-m. & dodson, j.j. 1999. an analysis of the distribution of juvenile atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) in nature as a function of relatedness using microsatellites. molecular ecology 8: 189–198. garant, d., dodson, j.j. & bernatchez, l. 2000. ecological determinants and temporal stability of the within-river population structure in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar l.). molecular ecology 9: 615–628. greenberg, l.a. & dahl, j. 1998. effect of habitat type on growth and diet of brown_trout, salmo_trutta l., in- stream enclosures. fisheries management and ecology 5: 331–348. greenberg, l.a. & giller, p.s. 2000. the potential of the flat-bed passive integrated transponder antennae for studying habitat use by stream fishes. ecology of fresh- water fish 9: 74–80. greenberg, l.a. & giller, p.s. 2001. individual variation in habitat use and growth of male and female brown_trout. ecography 24: 212–224. griffiths, s.w. & armstrong, j.d. 2000. differential responses of kin and nonkin salmon to patterns of water flow: does recirculation influence aggression? animal behaviour 59: 1019–1023. griffiths, s.w. & armstrong, j.d. 2001. the benefits of genetic diversity outweigh those of kin association in a territorial animal. proceedings of the royal society, london b 268: 1293–1296. griffiths, s.w. & armstrong, j.d. 2002. kin-biased terri- tory overlap and food sharing among atlantic salmon juveniles. journal of animal ecology 71: 480–486. griffiths, s.w. & magurran, a.e. 1997. schooling prefer- ences for familiar fish vary with group size in a wild guppy population. proceedings of the royal society london b 264: 547–551. hamilton, w.d. 1964. the genetic theory of social behaviour i and ii. journal of theoretical biology 7: 1–52. mjølnerød, i.b., refseth, u.h. & hindar, k. 1999. spatial association of genetically similar atlantic salmon juve- niles and sex bias in spatial patterns in a river. journal of fish biology 55: 1–8. olse´ n, k.h. 1989. sibling recognition in juvenile arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus (l.). journal of fish biology 34: 571–581. olse´ n, k.h. 1999. present knowledge of kin discrimination in salmonids. genetica 104: 295–299. olse´ n, k.h. & ja¨ rvi, t. 1997. effects of kinship on aggression and rna content in juvenile arctic charr. journal of fish biology 51: 422–435. olse´ n, k.h., ja¨ rvi, t. & lo¨ f, a.-c. 1996. aggressiveness (salmo_trutta l.) parr. and kinship in brown_trout behavioural ecology 7: 445–450. pfenning, d.w., sherman, p.w. & collins, j.p. 1994. kin recognition and cannibalism in polyphenic salamanders. behavioural ecology 5: 225–232. quinn, t.p. & busack, c.a. 1985. chemosensory recogni- tion of siblings in juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus kitsutch). animal behaviour 33: 51–56. quinn, t.p., dittman, a.h., peterson, n.p. & volk, e. 1994. spatial distribution, survival, and growth of sibling groups of juvenile coho salmon (oncorhyncus kisutch) in an experimental stream channel. canadian journal of zoology 72: 2119–2123. temeles, e.j. 1994. the role of neighbours in territorial systems: when are they ‘dear enemies’? animal behaviour 47: 339–350. twomey, h. & giller, p.s. 1990. stomach flushing and individual panjet tattooing of salmonids: an evaluation of the long-term effects on two wild populations. aquatic fisheries management 21: 137–142. waldman, b. 1988. problems of kin recognition. trends in ecology and evolution 3: 8–13. winberg, s. & olse´ n, k.h. 1992. the influence of rearing conditions on the sibling odour preference of juvenile arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus l. animal behaviour 44: 157–164. 259  