accepted: 15 november 2016 doi: 10.1111/eff.12327 o r i g i n a l a r t i c l e density- and species-dependent errors in single-pass timed electrofishing assessment of riverine salmonids hannele m. honkanen1 | jennifer a. dodd1 | jessica r. fordyce1 | patrick boylan2 |  colin e. adams1 1scottish centre for ecology and the natural environment, institute of biodiversity, animal health and comparative medicine, university of glasgow, rowardennan, glasgow, uk 2loughs agency of the foyle, carlingford and irish lights commission, 22 victoria road, londonderry, northern ireland, bt47 2ab, uk correspondence colin adams, scottish centre for ecology and the natural environment, institute of biodiversity, animal health and comparative medicine, university of glasgow, rowardennan, glasgow, uk. email: colin.adams@glasgow.ac.uk funding information interreg iv a, grant/award number: 2859 abstract electrofishing techniques are widely used for the estimation of the size of stream- dwelling fish populations for both fishery management and scientific study. in contrast to multiple pass, population depletion methods, single- pass catch- per- unit- effort (cpue) methods are less time- consuming and labour- intensive. a possible issue with the commonly used fixed total time cpue protocol is that it does not differentiate between the time spent actively fishing and the time incurred while not actively fish- ing (e.g. removing fish from nets and navigating the site). this issue is likely related to fish density. this study compared two methods of cpue electrofishing and tested the hypothesis that time spent handling fish and navigating a site can be a source of error in the commonly used fixed total time electrofishing method. seventy- one sites were sampled across three subcatchments in the foyle catchment in northern ireland. we found a difference in the catch per unit time between the two methods and that this difference increased with fish density. the fixed- time cpue method also failed to detect a species presence in low- density sites. k e y w o r d s directional bias, handling time, population estimation, salmo_salar 1 |  introduction the use of electrofishing techniques for the estimation of the size of stream- dwelling fish populations for both fishery management and scientific study is widespread and common (e.g. bohlin, hamrin, heggberget, rasmussen, & saltveit, 1989; hickey & closs, 2006). there are a variety of methodologies used to allow an estimate of fish population size, but these can be generally divided into two groups: multiple pass, population depletion methods, and rapid population assessment, providing catch- per- unit- effort (cpue) methods. multiple- pass methods combine electrofishing in a closed sam- pling area with a statistically effective population depletion tech- nique (zippin, 1958). this combined technique gives a high- quality estimate of fish abundance and species richness in the sampled area but is relatively labour- intensive, time- consuming and costly (kennard, pusey, harch, dore, & arthington, 2006; lobón- cerviá & utrilla, 1993; meador, mcintyre, & pollock, 2003). by contrast, the use of rapid population assessment electrofishing techniques to provide cpue data provides an alternative technique which is considerably less labour- intensive and cheaper but provides data of lower preci- sion (mitro & zale, 2000). several studies have shown that a rapid assessment sampling technique using timed sampling can provide an adequate estimate of fish abundance at the sample site (crozier & kennedy, 1994; dauphin, prevost, adams, & boylan, 2009; simonson & lyons, 1995). the quality of the estimate however depends upon the species composition and habitat features (bertrand, gido, & guy, 2006). when the aim of the data collection is to determine river or catchment scale fish density estimates, then rapid assessment electro- fishing techniques are frequently more appropriate than more quanti- tatively robust multiple pass techniques (crozier & kennedy, 1994). an additional advantage of rapid assessment electrofishing techniques is the reduced exposure of fish to electrical discharge from electrofishing which can cause injury and stress (densmore & panek, 2013; holliman & reynolds, 2002; snyder, 2003). 98  |  wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:98–102. © 2017 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltdhonkanen et al.     |  99 crozier and kennedy (1994) described a rapid assessment electro- fishing method, where sampling effort is calibrated to a fixed total time of 5 min, which has been widely adopted. this protocol does not dif- ferentiate between the time spent actively fishing (i.e. the time period when the anode is activated in the water) and the time incurred while not actively fishing (e.g. removing fish from nets and navigating the site). logically, the time spent not actively fishing is likely to be greater at sites where the fish densities are high, and thus, time spent handling fish is likely to be higher. a similar effect might reasonably be expected at sites with complex habitats where the electrofishing operators are required to navigate obstacles. in addition, one might also expect there to be significant differences between the ability of operators, which has the potential to affect time spent not actively fishing. in this study, we compared the fixed total time method described above with a method that used an electrofishing backpack timer recording only the time the anode was active and fishing. because 5 min is a commonly used fixed sampling time, this period was used in this study. the aim of this experiment was to investigate the potential effect of handling time on the catch and study if, and how, this effect changes with increasing fish density. our hypothesis is that as fish density increases and thus more fish are captured, the handling time increases leading to increasing error associated with the fixed 5 min sampling method. 2 |  materials and methods 2.1 | study area seventy- one sites were sampled by electrofishing across three sub- catchments in the foyle catchment (the rivers faughan, roe and camowen) in northern ireland (see figure 1). the two most com- mon fish species found in the catchment are atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) and brown_trout (salmo_trutta). other riverine species include european eel (anguilla anguilla), river lamprey (lampetra fluviatilis), three- spined stickleback (gasterosteus aculeatus), minnow (phoxinus phoxinus) and stone loach (barbatula barbatula). figure 1 map of northern ireland with the foyle catchment highlighted and the sampling sites in the catchments of faughan, roe and camowen honkanen et al. caught using the fishing time (5 min). the latter represents the num- ber of fish caught using in the elapsed time (5 min) plus the additional catch. handling effort was represented and quantified as the difference in catch per unit time (cput, fish caught/min) between the two meth- ods. this was compared against the total fish caught at the end of the fishing time (5 min) (used as a proxy for total fish density) using pearson’s correlation. the expectation that the cput value for the fishing time (5 min) would be higher than that for elapsed time (5 min) because handling time is not reducing the time spent fishing was tested using a paired t test. all analyses were performed using r ver- sion 3.0.3 (r core team, 2013). 3 |  results a total of 2013 salmonids (1620 atlantic salmon and 393 brown_trout) were caught at the 71 sites sampled during the study. atlantic salmon and brown_trout were found on 65 and 53 of the 71 sam- pled sites respectively. the total number of salmonids caught per site varied from 0 to 90 (28.4 ± 18.8; at only one site were no salmonids captured). the total catch using the fishing time (5 min) methodol- ogy was significantly higher than the catch using the elapsed time (5 min) method (paired t test, t(277) = −10.349, p < .001), and for 33 of the 71 sites, the difference in catch was at least threefold. the total elapsed time that is the total time spent fishing using the fishing time (5 min) method varied from 9 min 27 s (542 s) to 26 min (1560 s). the magnitude of additional time (i.e. the difference in the time taken to complete the elapsed time (5 min) and fishing time (5 min) techniques) increased significantly with total fish caught (pearson’s correlation, r = .5505, n = 66, p < .001) (see figure 2). as the focus of sampling was on atlantic salmon streams, there was an unbalanced number of the two species (1620 atlantic salmon and 393 brown_trout), and thus, they were analysed separately. the cput values for the two methods were tested with a paired t test to see whether they are different. the cput values were signifi- cantly smaller with the elapsed time (5 min) method, both for atlantic 100  |     sampling took place during low flows in 2013 between late july and mid september. the sampling sites varied in width (2.37–17.10 m, 7.28 ± 3.79 m), depth (<20 cm to >100 cm), and substrate character- istics (coarse complex habitat to smooth homogenous habitat). the sites were chosen to span a wide range of habitat types supporting juvenile salmonids and thus allowing comparisons between suspected high- and low- density sites. 2.2 | sampling procedure electrofishing was conducted using a 500w backpack system by e- fish (uk) ltd., fitted with an inbuilt countdown timer which only activated when the current flowed into the water and thus was actively fishing. electrofishing was undertaken by a team consisting of two people. no stop nets were used. all sampling was undertaken between 9.00 and 17.00. timed rapid assessment electrofishing was conducted using two different methods. electrofishing was conducted for a timed 5 min total time, determined using a stopwatch. this measure included the time spent handling of any fish caught. this is subsequently referred to as the elapsed time (5 min) method. simultaneously, the electrofishing sampling was timed with the backpack countdown timer for 5 min of actual fishing time. this measure comprised only the time when the electrofishing electrode was in the water and the power on. this is subsequently referred to as the fishing time (5 min). the difference in time between the two methods is called additional time and the dif- ference in number of fish caught between the methodologies is called additional catch. sampling sites were always approached from the downstream direction to minimise disturbance to fish. the electrofishing team fished by moving upstream in a zigzag fashion walking from bank to bank. the net operator always stayed downstream of the backpack operator. only atlantic salmon and brown_trout were collected. the fish were netted as quickly as possible to minimise injury from electric shock and then moved to a holding container. once the elapsed time (5 min) period ended (determined by stopwatch), any salmonids caught were retained in a single container. electrofishing sampling then con- tinued until the backpack countdown timer indicated the fishing time (5 min) was reached. the duration of the whole sampling process from the start to the end of the fishing time, here referred to as total elapsed time, was then recorded. total elapsed time was always greater than fishing time (5 min) because it also included time taken to handle fish and navigate the collection site. all captured atlantic salmon and brown_trout were mildly anaes- thetised and measured for length (fork length, nearest mm). the fish were then allowed to fully recover and were then returned to the river. the captured fish were divided into two age groups (0 + and older) using site- specific species length frequency distributions. 2.3 | statistical analysis the methodology yielded two measures of fish captured: the number of fish caught using the elapsed time (5 min) and the number of fish figure 2 the relationship between the additional time (seconds) and total number of fish (atlantic salmon and brown_trout) caught honkanen et al.     |  101 figure 3 the relationship between the cpue (fish caught/minute) difference between the two methods and the number of fish caught at an individual site, left for atlantic salmon and right for brown_trout salmon (paired t(67) = −9.0029, p- value <.001) and brown_trout (paired t(67) = −5.7401, p- value<.001). as the total fish density increases, the difference in cput (fish/ min) between the two methods (i.e. cputfishing time – cputelapsed time) also increases, see figure 3. the difference in the cput for the two methods was significantly correlated (pearson) with the fish den- sity for both species (atlantic salmon, r = .974, n = 67, p < .001; brown_trout, (r = .959, n = 67, p < .001). 3.1 | low- density sites there were two sites where the elapsed time (5 min) method failed to detect the presence of atlantic salmon when the fishing time (5 min) method did (catching one and seven fish) and nine sites where elapsed time (5 min) method failed to detect brown_trout while fishing time (5 min) method did (catching 1–3 fish). this is clearly only an issue with low- density sites, so the occurrence of this is compared within low- density sites. defining a low- density site as having 10 or less fish, of the 71 sites sampled there were 14 low- density sites for atlantic salmon and 41 low- density sites for brown_trout. the percentage of sites where the elapsed time (5 min) method recorded species absence but the fishing time (5 min) method recorded presence was 21.4% for atlantic salmon and 21.9% for brown_trout. 4 |  discussion rapid electrofishing survey techniques, based on collecting for a fixed level of effort, are very widely used to estimate a number of variables related to fish communities in riverine habitats (e.g. hickey & closs, 2006). the expectation of these techniques is that they will provide data on species presence/absence, fish community structure and a measure of the abundance of a species (as an abundance index or as a measure of cpue). in some circumstances, there is the expec- tation that it is possible to convert these abundance measures to approximate measures of local fish density (crozier & kennedy, 1994; dauphin et al., 2009). where that fixed sampling effort is based on sampling for a fixed period of total sampling time (e.g. crozier & kennedy, 1994), the study presented here shows that there are sources of error asso- ciated with this type of sampling and importantly that this error changes as a result of characteristics inherent to the fish population being sampled. in an analysis of data from 71 sampling sites, fish density affected the ability of a simple elapsed fixed time period of sampling to detect the presence of both atlantic salmon and brown_trout. on around 20% of occasions at sites where fish density was relatively low and when a commonly used fixed total sampling period technique (called elapsed time [5 min] in this study) was employed, it failed to detect the pres- ence of brown_trout and atlantic salmon. here, we show that a sim- ple modification to this technique to eliminate time spent not used in active fish capturing (when fish are being handled and the operators were navigating the sampling area – in this study called fishing time [5 min]) resulted in much higher levels of species presence detection (20% higher), when fish density was low. in addition, we hypothesised that a sampling method based on a total elapsed fixed period (elapsed time [5 min] in this study) is likely to result in an inherent underestimate of fish at high fish density com- pared with low fish density. the logic underpinning this being that, at higher fish density the proportion of the total elapsing time that is used in handling fish (removing them from the water, placing them in bankside containment, etc.) will increase disproportionately compared with lower density. for atlantic salmon at the highest density in this study, catch per unit time is about 12 fish per minute higher using the fishing time technique compared with the elapsed time technique, whereas the dif- ference between these two methods at lower fish densities is around two fish per minute. the actual salmon catch rate difference for 5 min for these two techniques thus ranges from around five fish (for a total catch from both techniques of 10 fish) to 60 fish (for a total catch of 80 fish). as expected, the difference between catch per unit time between the two techniques was always positive, indicating that catch rate per unit time was greater using the fishing time (5 min) technique. this is most likely the result of the elimination of fish handling time and site navigation time by the electrofishing operators. more importantly, the difference in catch per unit time increases with fish density for both atlantic salmon and brown_trout, showing a strong effect of fish den- sity on fish catch per unit time. acknowledgements this work was supported by funding from the european union’s interreg iva programme (project 2859 “ibis”) managed by the special eu programmes body. the authors would like to thank staff at the loughs agency for technical assistance. 102  |     references bertrand, k. n., gido, k. b., & guy, c. s. (2006). an evaluation of single- pass versus multiple- pass backpack electrofishing to estimate trends in species abundance and richness in prairie streams. transactions of the kansas academy of science, 109, 131–138. bohlin, t., hamrin, s., heggberget, t. g., rasmussen, g., & saltveit, s. j. (1989). electrofishing – theory and practice with special emphasis on salmonids. hydrobiologia, 173, 9–43. crozier, w. w., & kennedy, g. j. a. (1994). application of semi- quantitative electrofishing to juvenile salmonid stock surveys. journal of fish biology, 45, 159–164. dauphin, g., prevost, e., adams, c. e., & boylan, p. (2009). a bayesian approach to estimating atlantic salmon fry densities using a rapid sam- pling technique. fisheries management and ecology, 16, 399–408. densmore, c. l., & panek, f. m. (2013). effects of depletion sampling by standard three- pass pulsed dc electrofishing on blood chemistry parameters of fishes from appalachian streams. transactions of the american fisheries society, 33(2), 298–306. hickey, m. a., & closs, g. p. (2006). evaluating the potential of night spot- lighting as a method for assessing species composition and brown_trout abundance: a comparison with electrofishing in small streams. journal of fish biology, 69, 1513–1523. holliman, f. m., & reynolds, j. b. (2002). electroshock- induced injury juvenile white sturgeon. north american journal of fisheries in management, 22(2), 494–499. kennard, m. j., pusey, b. j., harch, b. d., dore, e., & arthington, a. h. (2006). estimating local stream fish assemblage attributes: sampling effort and efficiency at two spatial scales. marine and freshwater research, 57, 635–653. lobón-cerviá, j., & utrilla, c. g. (1993). a simple model to determine stream trout (salmo_trutta l.) densities based on one removal with elec- trofishing. fisheries research, 15, 369–378. honkanen et al. meador, m. r., mcintyre, j. p., & pollock, k. h. (2003). assessing the effi- cacy of single- pass backpack electrofishing to characterize fish com- munity structure. transactions of the american fisheries society, 132(39), 39–46. mitro, m. g., & zale, a. v. (2000). predicting fish abundance using single- pass removal sampling. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 57, 951–961. r development core team. (2013). r: a language and environment for statistical computing. r foundation for statistical computing, vienna, austria. isbn 3-900051-07-0, url retrieved from http://www.r-proj- ect.org/. simonson, t. d., & lyons, j. (1995). comparison of catch per effort and removal procedures for sampling stream fish assemblages. north american journal of fisheries management, 15, 419–427. snyder, d. e. (2003). invited overview: conclusions from a review of elec- trofishing and its harmful effects on fish. reviews in fish biology and fisheries, 13, 445–453. zippin, c. (1958). the removal method of population estimation. journal of wildlife and management, 22, 82–90. how to cite this article: honkanen hm, dodd ja, fordyce jr, boylan p, adams ce. density- and species-dependent errors in single-pass timed electrofishing assessment of riverine salmonids. ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:98–102. https://doi.org/10.1111/eff.12327  