ecology of freshwater fish 2003: 12: 93–94 printed in denmark  all rights reserved copyright # blackwell munksgaard 2003 first announcement behaviour and ecology of freshwater ﬁsh: linking ecology and individual behaviour international conference 22–26 august 2004 freshwater centre, silkeborg, denmark populations and ecosystems ultimately consist of individuals. however, only recently have attempts been made to put individual behaviour of fresh- water ﬁshes into a broader ecological context. this is done in order to obtain a deeper insight into the ecological mechanisms in rivers and lakes. this conference is aimed at congregating and discussing the latest developments and results in freshwater ﬁsh ecological research, with particu- lar focus on linking individual behaviour and ecology. the scope of the science to be presented ranges from basic to applied research, but we encourage considerations of the implications of the results for management of river and lake ecosystems. acknowledging the great importance of sharing ﬁeld experiences, a minor evening ses- sion will be dedicated to experiments that went wrong – and we invite participants to give short contributions of instructive experiences. themes:  predator–prey interactions e.g. behavioural effects – predator and prey, population and individual level, foraging beha- viour, anti-predatory behaviour  migration and dispersal e.g. life history and migration strategies, popu- lation dynamics, horizontal distribution patterns, homing and dispersal, long and short-term move- ments  mate choice and reproductive behaviour unravelling mating systems in ﬁshes and asses- sing their ecological and evolutionary signiﬁcance, human exploitation of populations and its impact on the mating structure scientific contributions participants are invited to present a scientiﬁc paper and/or a poster. potential contributors should indicate their initial interest by completing the form on the conference website (http://www. dfu.min.dk/fﬁ/ﬁshconf2004.htm) and by specify- ing whether they intend to give a presentation or only to attend the conference. further announce- ments will be forwarded to the responding parti- cipants with registration forms, guidelines for abstracts and further details. contributors of presentations are invited to submit a manuscript for publication in a special issue of ecology of freshwater fish, following a peer-review process. manuscripts should be com- pleted and submitted at the conference. space limitations may restrict the number of participants and contributions. 93 announcement abstracts for oral or poster contributions should be submitted no later than february 2004. pre-registration ^ intention to attend program the conference is intended to comprise four days of scientiﬁc sessions, each day opening with a key note lecture. there will also be a poster session. during the conference an excursion will enable the participants to see some of the attractions in the area. venue the conference will be held at the freshwater centre in silkeborg, denmark. silkeborg is a small town (c. 50,000 citizens) situated in the lake district in the middle of the main peninsula of denmark, jutland. the freshwater centre is situated 2 km from the city centre, which can be reached by foot (approx. 20 min) or by bus. the freshwater centre is placed in an outstand- ing location surrounded by lakes and woodland. next to the conference venue is one of the attrac- tions of the town, aqua, an exhibition aquarium also comprising a small zoo with local wildlife. how to get there silkeborg is reached by train or by airplane to karup airport, 45 min away. karup airport mainly serves domestic ﬂights, but with ﬂight connections to the international airport of copenhagen regularly through the day. accommodation a limited number of rooms are available at the freshwater centre. accommodation can be arranged in town, which holds several hotels in variable prize classes as well as a hostel. intention to attend should be expressed by ﬁlling in the pre-registration form on the conference website: http://www.dfu.min.dk/fﬁ/ﬁshconf2004. htm. on the online-form, we encourage you to note whether you wish to offer a paper or a poster or just to attend the conference. more information all information will appear online on the con- ference website: http://www.dfu.min.dk/fﬁ/ﬁsh- conf2004.htm. important dates february 2003 pre-registration – intention to attend forms avail- able online september 2003 second announcement, registrations forms avail- able online february 2004 deadline for submission of abstracts may 2004 final registration without surcharge at the conference deadline for submission of manuscripts conveners danish institute for fisheries research, department of inland fisheries, vejlsøvej 39, dk- silkeborg, denmark; e-mail: fﬁ@dfu.min.dk erik mortensen, editor of ecology of freshwater fish, ørnsøvej 15, dk-silkeborg, denmark; e-mail: erik.mortensen.edit@mail.tele.dk 94  