accepted: 19 january 2017 doi: 10.1111/eff.12343 e d i t o r i a l 25 years of eff—a thank you to the co- founding editor javier lobón- cerviá this first issue of the journal of ecology of freshwater fish (eff) was published in september 1992, a creation of dr’s erik mortensen and javier lobón- cerviá. during the 25 years that has passed since then, javier has been the editor in chief, handling a large number of submis- sions. he oversaw the operations of eff, and helped grow the jour- nal, increasing it in both importance and impact. over this time, the scientific community has also observed a dramatic and rapid change in publication strategies, with the focus moving from paper to digital publication. the number of submissions has also increased, and since 2006 onwards on average 200 submissions have been handled per year. erik mortensen made the first proposal to the munksgaard publishing company about the possibility of establishing a new jour- nal focussing on the ecology of freshwater fish. when he got a posi- tive response from the publisher, he recruited javier as a fellow editor (lobón- cerviá, 2011). at that time, the number of scholarly journals in the discipline was still somewhat limited, and there seemed to be a niche for a new one. and that indeed turned out to be the case. in 1992, two issues containing 138 pages were published. the journal has now increased to four issues and greater than 600 pages annu- ally. the major increase in the number of published pages happened in 2006, when the number of published papers and pages almost doubled. during the same time, the impact factor of the journal has steadily increased from being around 1.0 during the early 2000s to its recent level around 2.0 (figure 1). in 2015, eff was ranked 11th of 52 journals within the field of fisheries and 32nd of 104 within the field of marine and freshwater biology. the journal also moved to online- only publication in 2015. there have also been changes in publishers of eff. the journal has moved from munksgaard to blackwell munksgaard, and now to its present home at john wiley & sons limited. the first issue of eff did not contain an editorial or commentary explaining the aims and goals of the journal, but it did contain a per- spective paper by peter larkin (larkin, 1992). in his perspective, larkin explained that “the march of discovery in all branches of science will have major implications for freshwater fisheries research. the next few decades will be demanding of the creative energies of young re- searchers”. since then, eff has tried to direct the “creative energies” to answer general and pressing ecological questions, and hopefully, we moved the field while doing so. as the journal increased in volume and impact, so did the labour needed to maintain its quality and the publication schedule. when figure 1 annual variation in number of citable items and associated impact factor (ip) for ecology of freshwater fish. data are extracted from isi journal citation reports © ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:517–518. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff   |  517 © 2017 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd518  |     erik mortensen died far too early in life, javier recruited david heins and asbjørn vøllestad as co- editors. but javier maintained the lead and kept at it until recently. now he has decided to step down—after 25 years of service for the journal. as he steps down from the helm, david heins takes over the lead, asbjørn vøllestad remains a strong presence on the editorial team, and two new editors have been re- cruited to help steer the ship in the right direction. phaedra budy and nuria sanz are now editors, and their competences will help keep eff still searching for the young researchers with creative energy and pressing ecological questions in the ecology of freshwater fish. so, at this time, we say a heartfelt thank you to javier for his 25 years of service as editor of eff! editorial 1department of ecology & evolutionary biology, tulane university, new orleans, la, usa 2aquatic watershed and earth resources, utah state university, logan, ut, usa 3department of biology, university of girona, girona, spain 4department of biosciences, university of oslo, oslo, norway correspondence asbjørn vøllestad, department of biosciences, university of oslo, oslo, norway. email: avollest@ibv.uio.no references david heins1 phaedra budy2 nuria sanz3 larkin, p. (1992). future prospects and their implications for research on the ecology of freshwater fish. ecology of freshwater fish, 1, 1–4. lobón-cerviá, j. (2011). on the 20th anniversary of eff and the luarca symposium. ecology of freshwater fish, 20, 327. asbjørn vøllestad4  