ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 144–156 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes: a simple landscape ecology model explaining the large variability in size of salmon runs across gaspe watersheds, canada kim m, lapointe m. regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes: a simple landscape ecology model explaining the large variability in size of salmon runs across gaspe watersheds, canada. ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 144–156. ó 2010 john wiley & sons a ⁄ s abstract – atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) rivers in the gaspe peninsula, quebec, present a 20 to 1 variability in the average numbers of returning adult salmon per km2 of watershed area (the ‘speciﬁc run size’). these variations are very poorly explained by interbasin differences in total stream length (r2 = 0.033, p = 0.533) or in estimates of total area of salmon habitat that fail to take into account complementarity and interconnections across life stage habitats (r2 = 0.065, p = 0.448). the relative spatial distribution of three complementary habitat types (adult holding pools, spawning beds, parr habitats) is hypothesised to be an important factor controlling the production of salmon at any given watershed area or given total stream length, and by extension the numbers of adults returning each year to spawn. we developed a simple riverine landscape ecology (or riverscape) model that uses easily accessible topographic map sources to identify optimally productive river segments. these segments were identiﬁed based on large-scale river and valley features and the associated spatial organisation of complementary salmon habitats. we tested the ability of this model to predict salmon run sizes for 14 watersheds in the gaspe peninsula. the aggregate length of optimally productive segments, as deﬁned in our model, is a strong predictor of the average size of the annual salmon runs for these watersheds (r2 = 0.913, p < 0.0005). furthermore, speciﬁc salmon run sizes were accurately predicted (r2 = 0.771, p < 0.0005) after removal of the obvious scale effects of watershed size. m. kim, m. lapointe department of geography, mcgill university, montreal, qc, canada key words: landscape ecology; salmo_salar; productive habitat; salmon runs; spatial complementarity; segment scale m. lapointe, department of geography, mcgill university, 805 sherbrooke street west, montreal, qc canada h3a 2k6; e-mail: michel.lapointe@mcgill.ca accepted for publication october 21, 2010 introduction factors the spatial organisation of habitat patches (flather & bevers 2002) and the spatial complementarity of different essential habitats have been recognised as important controlling the production of organisms in a landscape (dunning et al. 1992): larger populations are expected in landscapes in which the different habitat patches required by an organism at various stages of its life are within close proximity of one another. the importance of spatial this complementarity has been recognised for aquatic organisms as well; frissell et al. (1986), schlosser (1991), kocik & ferreri (1998), poole (2002) and le pichon et al. (2009) have all emphasised the need to take into account the heterogeneity and connectivity of river habitat types, with a focus on the spatial organisation of complementary habitats for given organisms in daily, seasonal and life cycle displace- ments. similarly, freeman & grossman (1993) have shown that the spatial distribution of cyprinid ﬁshes cannot always be explained by a simple measure of the 144 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00471.x regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes availability of a single type of habitat. rather, the presence and the distribution of complementary hab- itats have an important role in determining whether a particular location is occupied by ﬁsh. recognising the importance of spatial heterogeneity on populations of aquatic organisms, fausch et al. (2002) emphasised the need to examine river ﬁsh populations and habitats at ﬁne grain and over larger spatial scales, as the movement of individuals in many their life cycles can span ﬁsh species throughout distances of 103 to 105 m. burnett et al. (2007) adopted a similar approach by using a broad-scale perspective to identify stream reaches in the coastal province of oregon with a greater potential of providing high quality rearing habitat, although habitat complementarity was not a key criterion in the model. relatively few other studies on ﬁsh ecology focus on broader spatial scales (but see torgersen et al. 2006); thus the multi-scale natural and anthropogenic controls affecting ﬁsh communities are often overlooked, which results in a large gap in our understanding of important life history events (fausch et al. 2002). atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) are a ﬁsh species whose freshwater habitat requirements vary seasonally and through its life cycle, and for which an optimal organisation of the different types of essential habitats is hypothesised to be an important factor controlling production (dunning et al. 1992; kocik & ferreri 1998). optimal spawning habitat for atlantic salmon occurs predominantly in reaches with gravel to cobble bed grain sizes (neither too ﬁne for good intergravel ﬂow nor too coarse for the female to dig her redd) and this represents a relatively narrow range of substrate sizes compared to overall watershed availability (crisp & carling 1989; kondolf & wolman 1993; davey & lapointe 2007). habitat for older juveniles (parr), on the other hand, often lies in reaches that are distinct from spawning habitat. parr require habitat with coarser, typically boulder-rich substrate and faster water, where they can efﬁciently feed on drifting prey while themselves well positioned (bioenergetically) near boulder wakes (wankowski & thorpe 1979; rimmer et al. 1984; morantz et al. 1987). parr also hide from predators in this high roughness, white water habitat (normally poor in cobble, spawning substrate (valdimarsson & metcalfe 1998), and can take shelter in the large bed interstices during the cold water seasons (cunjak 1988; heggenes & saltveit 1990). for older salmon juveniles in particular, survival to smoltiﬁcation appears to be optimal in boulder-rich reaches, habitats that are distinct and complementary to cobble-textured spawning reaches where the ﬁsh emerged as fry. moreover, in many atlantic salmon systems, some reaches with high-quality spawning substrate are much less used than others of comparable substrate quality and quantity (coulombe-pontbriand & lapointe their 2004a; davey & lapointe 2007). a form of habitat complementation for spawners appears to be at work, which involves having adult ‘holding pool’ habitat, unusually deep pools with very slow currents, located not too far from quality spawning reaches. there is ﬁeld evidence that large numbers of adults congregate in a limited number of such holding pool habitats along some rivers, where they rest in mid-summer before migrating upstream to spawning reaches in the fall (crisp 1996). for example, in a study conducted on the aberdeenshire dee in scotland, hawkins & smith (1986) observed adult atlantic salmon main- taining a long residence period in pools located 5–10 km downstream of spawning sites. this behaviour was not although the reason for conﬁrmed, hawkins & smith (1986) suggested that adults compete for the best holding positions below spawning sites, such that they will be the ﬁrst to attain the spawning grounds when conditions are favourable. in an earlier study, jones (1959, as cited by hawkins & smith 1986) similarly observed adult salmon lingering in pools mostly below (and only occasionally above) spawning grounds. it has also been speculated that the quantity and quality of deep, low velocity holding pools in a river may have an important inﬂuence on the safe upstream migration of adults (bardonnet & baglinie`re 2000). frequent, bedrock canyon segments offer many such large holding pools in the salmon rivers of the gaspe peninsula (eastern quebec, canada), though the length and distribution of these canyon segments vary from one watershed to another (kim 2009). here we hypothe- sise that complementation between adult holding pools, spawning gravel-cobble reaches and boulder reaches for older parr is an important factor controlling salmon production, and in turn salmon run sizes. we test this through a simple landscape ecology model, applied at valley segment scale (103–105 m) (fausch et al. 2002). the objective of this study is to demonstrate that a simple model for the spatial organisation of comple- mentary salmon habitats in a riverscape is effective to explain differences in salmon population sizes, and that the predictive power of the habitat model degrades substantially when spatial organisation is ignored. in the absence of data on salmon smolt output by river segment, we test the model in terms of its usefulness to explain available data on inter-watershed variations in salmon spawner run sizes, assumed to reﬂect inter- watershed variations in smolt production across this region. in a sample of 14 salmon rivers in the gaspe peninsula, we identiﬁed optimally productive seg- ments based on proximity across adjacent river segments of three key types of complementary fresh- water habitats for salmon production. we hypothesise 145 kim & lapointe that our metric for ‘optimally productive segment lengths’, which incorporates habitat complementarity, is a stronger predictor of differences in spawner run sizes compared to reach-scale assessments of ‘total salmon habitat area’ and other metrics that do not incorporate complementarity effects. this study does not propose a global model for predicting salmon run sizes, but tests the importance of the spatial organisa- tion of essential habitats in controlling the production and population size of salmon in gaspe riverscapes. study sites overview this study focuses on 14 atlantic salmon rivers and their tributaries in the gaspe peninsula, located in the appalachian geological region of quebec, canada (fig. 1). the landscape in the gaspe peninsula, south of the igneous formations underlying the interior shickshock highlands, is dominated by weaker shale and sandstone lithologies, with well-deﬁned river valleys, incised into ﬂat interﬂuves which are remnants of an old, cenezoic age peneplain (desjardins et al. 1999). the local relief between incised valley bottoms and the interﬂuves averages 250–350 m over most study watersheds. kilometre-long, conﬁned canyon segments are frequent along these rivers wherever glaciations have triggered inter-valley avulsions and subsequent incision into the friable lithologies. the 14 rivers considered in this study support salmon runs ranging in size from approximately 100 to 4100 salmon per year (quarter century means; table 1). the large variance in salmon run sizes cannot be explained exclusively by the variable drainage basin areas, as there is a large (approximately 20-fold) variability in speciﬁc runs, ranging from 0.09 )2 of watershed (table 1). this to 1.65 adults km variability is statistically unrelated to watershed size, latitude or longitude. moreover, adjacent watersheds of comparable sizes (and bedrock lithological zona- tion) can have quite contrasting speciﬁc run sizes (fig. 1). note for example the 3.3-fold contrast between speciﬁc runs in the adjacent petite cascapedia )2) and bonaventure (drainage basin 6: 0.33 adults km )2) rivers, and the (drainage basin 7: 1.10 adults km 1.5-fold difference between the adjacent dartmouth )2) and york (drainage basin 8: 1.11 adults km (drainage basin 9: 1.63 adults km )2) rivers. main types of geomorphic segments along gaspe salmon rivers we conducted coarse resolution, riverscape analyses the gaspe rivers, using 1:15,000 scale aerial of photographs and 1:20,000 scale topographic maps, 146 fig. 1. location of the 14 watersheds examined in this study. the river networks are only shown until they reach a channel slope of 1%. the watersheds have been shaded according to the size of their speciﬁc runs (number of returning adult salmon per square kilometre of watershed). table 1. mean annual discharge, basin area and salmon run information for the 14 watersheds considered in this study. regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes river matapedia nouvelle cascapedia petite cascapedia bonaventure dartmouth york sainte-anne matane saint-jean petit pabos grand pabos grande rivie`re malbaie average size of annual salmon run (no. of adults per year)* coefﬁcient of variation speciﬁc runs (no. of adults per km2 of watershed) drainage basin area (km2) total river length with a slope less than 1% (km) mean annual discharge measured near river mouth (m3 s )1) 4141 101 2209 482 2635 1075 1733 818 2753 1306 102 140 704 186 0.19 0.60 0.28 0.32 0.29 0.30 0.21 0.38 0.18 0.31 0.59 0.73 0.37 0.62 1.08 0.09 0.70 0.33 1.10 1.11 1.63 0.97 1.65 1.15 0.42 0.22 1.01 0.92 3824 1172 3170 1458 2399 971 1062 841 1672 1132 240 627 698 203 477.6 133.2 300.5 145.8 341.1 105.1 111 64 195.1 153.2 60 79.5 113.1 32 57.7 27.6 61.2 33.3 51.9 19.2 21.7 23.6 40.0 – – – – – *except for the nouvelle (1991–2009) and the matapedia (1987–2009), all values are based on salmon run counts from 1984 to 2009. complemented with ﬁeld visits in select reaches (kim 2009), in order to evaluate the segment scale (103– 105 m) morphology of the rivers and valleys used for salmon spawning or rearing. these analyses excluded small and steep headwater tributaries whose channel slopes greatly exceed 1% (see methods for more detail on this slope limit). these geomorphic analyses revealed that gaspe rivers can be broadly partitioned into three types of relatively homogeneous valley segments based on channel slope, bed sediment size trends and degree of valley conﬁnement (fig. 2). these types are identiﬁed here as bedrock canyons (bc), laterally conﬁned meanders (lcms) and unconﬁned meanders (ums), and are detailed below. individual valley segments generally range from 1 to 25 km in length along the study systems. more details on segment level classiﬁcation criteria are given in kim (2009). bedrock canyons (bc) are the dominant sources of coarse sediment in the study rivers (kim 2009). thus, in gaspe rivers, bcs act as boulder ‘source zones’ triggering ‘sedimentary link’ units (sensu rice & church 1998; davey & lapointe 2007). in bc fig. 2. diagram of the three types of geomorphic segments observed in rivers in the gaspe peninsula: unconﬁned meanders (ums), laterally conﬁned meanders (lcms) and bedrock canyon (bc) segments (modiﬁed from coulombe-pontbriand & lapointe 2004b). segments, the channel is deeply incised into bedrock (or occasionally into boulder-rich, glacio-ﬂuvial ter- races) and is ﬂanked on either side by steep valley sides, with minimal or no ﬂoodplain development (fig. 2). steep channel slopes, combined with the conﬁned channels, result in large shear stresses on the bed and banks at high discharges. as a result, sporadic boulder-sized bedrock fragments are introduced into the channel, while most gravel-cobble bar material are ﬂushed into lcm and um units downstream. in bc segments, gravel-cobble bars are rare, while deep pools, bedrock ledges and large (>1 m), emergent boulders can be easily detected on 1:15,000 scale aerial photographs. in lcms, lcm segments have somewhat wider valley bot- toms than bc segments, developing ﬂoodplain ﬂats on the inside of meander bends (fig. 2) that are clearly visible by routine 1:15,000 aerial photograph stereos- copy (3d visualisation). by deﬁnition, in lcm segments, ﬂoodplains at the meander spurs must have a width equal to at least half the lateral amplitude of the meanders, otherwise, the segment was considered as a bc segment. the bedrock (or occasionally glacio-ﬂuvial) valley sides locally restrict the lateral outward expansion of the meandering channel, resulting in multiple contact points at mean- der apices between the channel and the valley wall. the gradual erosion of the valley sides at such contact points results in a spatially sporadic introduction of boulders into the otherwise cobble rich channel. such sporadic introduction of coarse sediment is manifested on 1:15,000 aerial photographs as a relatively lower density of large boulders than in canyons. despite the large scatter in channel bed sediment sizes in these lcm segments due to sporadic boulders, a down- stream ﬁning trend remains detectable along their length (kim 2009). 147 kim & lapointe in um segments, the channel is able to meander freely across a wide valley bottom and is character- ised by wide ﬂoodplains (fig. 2). these segments also exhibit an absence or near-absence of large boulders. channel slopes typically decrease with increasing distance from the upstream end of the segment, such that these segments possess a concave upward longitudinal proﬁle, resulting in a clear decrease in grain sizes going downstream due to size selective transport of the bed material (ferguson & ashworth 1991; parker 1991; ferguson et al. 1996; rice & church 2001; davey & lapointe 2007). model assumptions: salmon habitats found in the three geomorphic segment types this section sets out the assumptions made in constructing our salmon riverscape model. no ade- quate interannual tracking data for small ﬁsh are currently available to support all these assumptions. however, our assumptions are supported by limited distributional data available from salmon wildlife managers in gaspe rivers (ministe`re des ressources naturelles et de la faune (mrnf), unpublished reports). they are also consistent with general knowl- edge of atlantic salmon ecology. first, given that salmon generally spawn in coarse gravel-cobble substrate, little and only very localised spawning activity is expected in bc segments, as the latter are dominated by solid bedrock and large, freshly plucked boulders. analyses of the spatial distribution of spawning activity among six gaspe rivers (available mrnf fall redd counts) conﬁrm that, of the three types of geomorphic segments described, bcs contain the lowest density of spawning redds (fig. 3a; see also kim 2009). lcm and um segments, both of which offer extensive cobble bars, are signiﬁcantly richer in spawning habitat. supported by this data, our simple model assumes that both lcm and um segments show similar median redd densities per river kilometre. although bc segments offer little spawning habitat, our model nonetheless assumes that these segments exert an indirect control on redd distribution along a river. the conspicuous canyon segments found along gaspe rivers offer multiple, deep pools in which congregations of adults are often observed resting in low velocities, in the lee of sharp bedrock ledges. furthermore, shading from canyon walls and ground- water seepage at the base of fragmented shale bedrock cliffs temper summer water temperatures in these deep pools. we make the general assumption (supported by ﬁshing guide observations) that such canyon segments offer the best holding pools in gaspe rivers. we then tested whether salmon preferentially choose quality spawning segments within relatively close proximity (for adult, fall spawning displacements) upstream of a bc. we calculated the densities of redds in um and lcm segments located less or more than various distance thresholds within a 5–20-km range upstream from a bc segment (cf. hawkins & smith 1986). our analyses show that when consecutive bc segments are separated by more than 20 km, the densities of redds within a distance threshold of 15–17-km are signiﬁ- cantly greater than the densities of redds beyond the threshold (paired t-test, p < 0.100; see fig. 3b). for larger distance thresholds (>17 km), the differences in redd densities within and beyond the given limit are no longer signiﬁcant (p > 0.100), because reaches with low redd densities have been added to the former category. although redds are observed at greater distances, this analysis suggests that spawning activity is particularly concentrated in the ﬁrst 15 km, approx- imately, upstream of a bc segment. such a distance effect is supported by other studies of salmon spawn- ing behaviour (hawkins & smith 1986), although the role of bedrock canyon pools and the roughly 15 km threshold used here may well be speciﬁc to the salmon populations and riverscapes of the gaspe. (a) (b) fig. 3. box plots showing the density of redds in the three types of geomorphic segments found in 6 gaspe rivers (a); outliers are represented by the circle and asterisk. the surveys were conducted in 1998 (petite cascapedia), 2000 (bonaventure and a second, shorter survey on the petite cascapedia), 2001 (dartmouth), 2001–2002 (york), 2002 (saint-jean) and 2005 (cascapedia). bc, lcm and um are bedrock canyons, laterally conﬁned meander segments and unconﬁned meanders segments, respectively. figure b shows the density of redds per segment kilometre in all lcm and um segments, located within and beyond 15 km upstream of a bc segment. 148 regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes that helps boost importantly, our model also assumes that bc seg- ments located relatively close downstream from spawn- ing reaches provide a second type of complementation effect the production of salmon juveniles to smoltiﬁcation. analyses of available mrnf survey data on salmon juvenile densities have conﬁrmed the importance of boulder-rich segments in promoting greater juvenile salmon production in gaspe rivers (coulombe-pontbriand & lapointe 2004b; kim 2009). analyses of such data from the lower portions of seven gaspe rivers revealed that higher river mean densities of juveniles are strongly associated with rivers in which a large proportion of the surveyed area is occupied by bc and lcm segments (fig. 4), segment types both much richer in boulders than ums. further- more, the movement of young salmon juveniles is predominantly in the downstream direction (johnston 1997; webb et al. 2001; bujold et al. 2004), and bc segments are characterised as being rich in both boulder- sized sediment, deep holding pools and cooler, shaded waters. for these reasons, our model assumes that the presence of a bc segment within close proximity downstream of spawning grounds is doubly beneﬁcial for salmon production. cobble spawning substrate in um and lcm segments located at greater distances upstream from bcs are assumed to be less productive, not only because they are very far from large spawner holding pools, but also because the preferred, boulder- rich habitat in bcs is less accessible to juveniles in years subsequent to fry emergence. fig. 4. interannual, mean salmon juvenile densities along 7 gaspe rivers. the abscissa values apply only to the surveyed lengths of the rivers, spanning from 1 km below the most downstream electro- ﬁshing survey station to 1 km above the most upstream station. methods data on salmon runs our model relies on historical data on annual, adult salmon runs obtained from quebec wildlife agencies (mrnf; secteur faune quebec 2010). depending on river conditions, the counting methods used (counting fence, visual counts by canoe or snorkeling) are considered to yield relatively accurate estimates of the sizes of the salmon runs (caron et al. 2006). these counts include both grilses and multi-sea-year salmon. 25-year mean run sizes for each system were used: basin run data have interannual coefﬁcients of varia- tion in the range 0.18–0.73, with most values below 0.5 (table 1). standard errors on the 25-year, interan- nual mean run sizes fall in the range of 4–15% for the 14 rivers. subdivision of the rivers into geomorphic segments we partitioned the 14 rivers and their tributaries into multiple geomorphic segments, generally ranging in length from 1 to 25 km, based on channel and valley characteristics observable from coarse resolution data sources. in this study, 1:20,000 scale topographic maps (with a 10-m contour interval) and 1:15,000 scale aerial photographs were used (kim 2009). our approach bears some similarities with that of seelbach et al. (1997), who subdivided michigan rivers into valley segments, generally ranging from 3 to 60 km in length, based on various physical traits (hydrology, channel morphology, sediment budget, etc.) that are often identiﬁable from large-scale maps. the large scale, deﬁning characteristics of the three types of segments dominating gaspe rivers were described in the previous sections. we used 10-m contour topographic maps to detect segment scale changes in channel slope, as well as to obtain a coarse measure of the width of valley bottoms. the aerial photographs allowed us to identify large (>1 m), emergent boulders in the channel, which appear as white speckles on the photographs. furthermore, we were able to obtain a more precise estimate of the spatial extent of terraces or ﬂoodplains fringing the channel through stereopair air photo interpretation. for each watershed, we deﬁned as potential salmon habitat the main stem of the river and all tributaries upstream, up to an impassable fall or an average channel slope consistently above 1%, as determined from the topographic maps (fig. 1, table 1). results presented here were insensitive to setting this limit at 2%. although a rifﬂe with a slope as high as 3% may still be considered favourable for spawning activity (mills 1973, as cited by gibson 1993), atlantic salmon spawning densities decrease with increasing 149 kim & lapointe slope in a reach (moir et al. 1998) and spawnable cobble beds are infrequent in boulder rapids which dominate tributaries at slopes over 2% (montgomery & bufﬁngton 1997). and migration obstacles, and focuses on wetted widths of productive pool ⁄ rifﬂe, gravel reaches and boulder rapids as opposed to unproductive sandy reaches, overly deep pools or backwater reaches. calculation of the total length of optimally productive habitat in a watershed results we develop a segment scale metric for quantifying the amount of ‘optimally productive habitat’ in a watershed as a function of the observed organisation of geomor- phic segments along the river network. based on the habitat use trends detailed above (see model assump- tions), we set the following criteria for identifying ‘optimally productive habitat’. first, due to the very low mean densities of redds found in bc segments, only lcm and um segments can directly qualify as repro- ductive habitat. secondly, we hypothesise that salmon production in a river is greater if there are shorter distances separating potential spawning habitat in lcm and um segments from holding pools and parr refuge and rearing habitat found in bc segments. thus, in our simple model, any lcm and um segment must be located within 15 km upstream of a bc segment to be considered optimally productive (see fig. 3b). we thus deﬁned the total length (in km) of ‘optimally productive habitat’ in a watershed as the sum of the lengths of um ⁄ lcm segments located within 15 km upstream of any bc segment and with a channel slope of less than 1%. should a um ⁄ lcm segment be longer than 15 km in length, then only the lower 15 km are included in the total length of optimally productive habitat. furthermore, if multiple consecutive um ⁄ lcm segments fall within the 15 km limit, then they are all included in the total optimally productive length. our model assumes that aggregate smolt production is largely (although not entirely) concentrated in these optimal segments. comparisons with an alternate metric of productive habitat we also compare the predictive power of our model with the current metric used in quebec for quantifying productive salmon habitat. we used data on the total ‘salmon areal production units’, developed by the quebec wildlife agency (mrnf), to assess atlantic salmon potential in each watershed (except for the malbaie, matane and matapedia rivers, for which this data was not available). while our own metric is deﬁned at valley segment scales, the mrnf ‘produc- tive area’ metric relies on more detailed, reach-scale habitat analysis; however, signiﬁcantly, the metric does not take into account the spatial organisation of complementary habitats. the mrnf metric is based on aerial photograph interpretation that identiﬁes falls 150 investigating the potential sources of variation in the sizes of the salmon runs to isolate the effect of structural habitat organisation, we ﬁrst removed the obvious effects on salmon runs of watershed scale or size. across the 14 study systems, the power law relation between runs and watershed area (r2 of 0.59) has a slope not signiﬁcantly different from one, indicating proportionality (fig. 5a). how- ever, this simple allometric model greatly overesti- mates the salmon run size of the grand pabos, nouvelle and the petite cascapedia rivers, and underestimates the size of the runs of the matane and york rivers. thus drainage area, when used as a scale-based predictor of the size of the salmon runs for rivers in this limited region, leaves substantial unex- plained variance, possibly due to structural habitat (riverscape) organisation factors, analysed next. to isolate the variance hypothesised here to be limited to riverscape habitat structure, we removed basin scale effects by calculating the range of ‘speciﬁc run’ values for the gaspe rivers (25-year average number of returning adult salmon per square kilometre the watershed). the median speciﬁc run is of 0.99 adult km the speciﬁc run values vary nearly 20-fold across the different watersheds, ranging )2 in the nouvelle river, from as low as 0.09 adult km )2 in the matane river to as high as 1.65 adults km (table 1, fig. 1). there is a 2.6-fold variation in speciﬁc runs across the central 50% of cases (with a range of 0.42–1.11 adults km )2, but )2). we next verify that the variance in speciﬁc runs is not simply due to physiographic differences in the total length of salmon-bearing streams at any given watershed area. the total stream lengths in each watershed with a channel slope under 1% (the main salmon-bearing networks displayed in fig. 1), normalised against the basin area, were used in a regression against the runs per watershed area. as expected, given the relatively uniform physiographic and hydrological context over the region, there is little intra-regional variability in drainage density or ‘spe- ciﬁc stream lengths’ the petit pabos system; see fig. 5b), which in turn does not explain speciﬁc variability systems (r2 = 0.033, p = 0.533). (except run for in the study finally, we note that the currently available, more reﬁned analysis of total ‘areal production units’ of salmon habitat (a metric that does not (mrnf) regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes (a) (c) (b) (d) fig. 5. other metrics for predicting the average run sizes (a) and the speciﬁc runs of the gaspe rivers (b–d). figures b, c and d represent metrics that do not account for the spatial organisation of the different types of essential habitats in the rivers, and which therefore fail to account for the unexplained variance in a. our model proved to be a stronger predictor of the run sizes and speciﬁc runs for these rivers (see figs 6 and 8). incorporate complementation effects) explains rela- tively poorly the observed inter-watershed variability of speciﬁc runs (fig. 5c: r2 = 0.065, p = 0.448). testing the availability of optimally productive lengths as a predictor of speciﬁc runs total stream length, to similarly remove the effects of watershed area and its correlate, from our scale dependent metric of ‘optimally productive river lengths’, we calculated the ‘fractional optimally pro- ductive river length’ for each watershed. this metric is simply the total estimated length of optimally produc- tive habitat divided by the total available stream length (here again, the aggregate of all segments falling below the 1% slope limit). the resultant fractional metric represents the proportion of the total available stream network (fig. 1) that qualiﬁes as optimally productive habitat based on our simple, salmon riverscape ecology assumptions. the fractional opti- mally productive river length has a strongly predictive and highly signiﬁcant effect across the data set on observed speciﬁc runs (r2 = 0.771, p < 0.0005, see )2; (standard error of the estimate) = 0.239 adult km see fig. 6). this metric is also strongly predictive for both, separately, numbers of returning grilses as well as numbers of salmon (for grilses: r2 = 0.410, p = 0.014, see = 0.162 returning multi-sea-year )2; for multi-sea-year salmon: r2 = 0.768, adult km p < 0.0005, see = 0.167 adult km )2). the apparent role of habitat complementation is illustrated in more detail when the large difference in fig. 6. the optimally productive river length, normalised against the total available stream length in the watershed, is a strong predictor of the speciﬁc run sizes for the 14 gaspe watersheds. see is the standard error of the estimate. 151 kim & lapointe 65°45'0"w 65°30'0"w 65°15'0"w optimally productive river lengths canyons confined meanders unconfined meanders n ' n " 0 5 4 ° 8 4 ' n " 0 0 3 ° 8 4 ' n " 0 5 1 ° 8 4 p e tit e c a s c a p e d i a 0 5 10 km 20 bonaventure ' n " 0 5 4 ° 8 4 ' n " 0 0 3 ° 8 4 ' n " 0 5 1 ° 8 4 65°45'0"w 65°30'0"w 65°15'0"w fig. 7. the geomorphic segments and optimally productive habitat of the petite cascapedia and bonaventure watersheds. the bonaventure has a much larger speciﬁc run size than the petite cascapedia (1.10 vs. 0.33 adult salmon per unit watershed area) that can be explained by its greater availability of optimally productive habitat (0.44 vs. 0.28 km of optimally productive habitat per total stream kilometre; see also fig. 6). of 1.10 speciﬁc run sizes of the adjacent bonaventure and petite cascapedia rivers is examined. despite similar climate, hydrology and bedrock geologies, the bona- venture river has much larger salmon runs than the )1), petite cascapedia river (2635 vs. 482 adults year two systems studied in more detail by coulombe- pontbriand & lapointe (2004a,b). this is not due solely to the somewhat larger bonaventure watershed area (there is a 3.3-fold contrast in speciﬁc runs in the bonaventure river: favour vs. )2), but rather appears to be related to 0.33 adults km the contrasts in the aggregate availability of optimally productive habitat (fig. 7). given the larger number of distinct but relatively short bc segments along its course, the bonaventure’s river network contains substantially more optimally productive habitat (44% of the total stream length, see fig. 6) than the petite cascapedia (28% of the total stream length). similar contrasts in riverscape patterns (not illustrated here) appear to explain the higher productivity of the york compared to the neighbouring saint-jean watershed (52% and 36% of their total stream lengths, respec- tively, qualify as optimally productive habitat). the )2) lowest observed speciﬁc run (0.09 salmon km occurs on the nouvelle river, for which the lower 152 40 km are occupied by one long um segment with no bc segment downstream. in this river, only short um and lcm segments located in the upper reaches of the river and its tributaries contribute to the aggregate length of optimally productive habitat. the very low fractional optimally productive river length (0.06 vs. an average of 0.36 across the study rivers), appears to be the cause of the weak salmon runs in the nouvelle watershed. isolating the effects of spatial complementation our model assumes that a um or lcm segment is ‘optimally productive’ if it is located within 15 km upstream of a bc segment, whose holding pools and boulder-rich substrate are hypothesised to be used by spawners and older juveniles, respectively. in order to further isolate the importance of this complementary effect, we tested an alternate metric of productive habitat length, in which all lcm and um segments, regardless of distance and position (upstream or downstream) to any neighbouring bc segments, are considered to be optimally productive habitat. when the fractional length of this alternate metric of productive habitat is used as a predictor of the speciﬁc salmon runs, no signiﬁcant correlation is obtained (r2 = 0.098, p = 0.276, see = 0.475; see fig. 5d). relative finally, the predictive performance of the proposed model (fig. 6, r2 = 0.771) can be directly compared with that of the metric of productive habitat areal units developed by the ministe`re des ressources naturelles et de la faune du quebec (mrnf), presented above. the mrnf metric, normalised against basin area was a very weak predictor of speciﬁc runs (r2 = 0.065, p = 0.448, see = 0.487; fig. 5c). similarly, the same metric normalised against aggregate stream length in each watershed (in the same manner as fig. 6) was also a weak predictor of speciﬁc runs (r2 = 0.329, p = 0.065, see = 0.413; not illustrated here), with correlation very heavily dependent on one data point, the york river. finally, and not surprisingly, when watershed size or scale effects are reintroduced, our riverscape metric of ‘productive habitat’ becomes an even more pow- erful predictor of run sizes (total length of optimally productive habitat as a predictor of the average size of the annual salmon runs; r2 = 0.913, p < 0.0005, see = 379 salmon; see fig. 8). in order to reduce the contribution to the ﬁt of the more variable runs (with higher uncertainties on mean run estimate), we retested this regression using the inverse of the coefﬁcient of variation of the salmon runs as the regression weight. the correlation remained very (r2 = 0.900, p < 0.0005). strong and signiﬁcant a similarly strong, weighted prediction is obtained regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes our results suggest sporadic boulder patches typically distributed within this type of natal segment. that in gaspe rivers, higher production is generally associated with higher frac- tional stream lengths of potentially spawnable lcm or um segments (which implies small aggregate canyon fraction, overall). however, production is enhanced when these individual meander segments are broken into lengths of less than 15 km by numerous, short bc segments. furthermore, the predictive power of the model degrades substantially if the spatial organisation of the different types of geomorphic segments is ignored (fig. 5d). correlation is not causation, of course, and our ecological model assumptions could be further tested, for example, with genetically-based parental assignation studies linking fry collected along the river to spawners that were ﬁn-clipped in the various holding pools along the river. other possible tests include mark-recapture survivorship studies of juveniles tagged at various distances from canyons (bcs) and collected at smolt fences. however, none of these data were available for any of the 14 rivers analysed. our empirical results are in agreement with dun- ning et al.’s (1992) assessment of the importance of spatial complementarity (or ‘landscape complementa- tion’) in controlling population sizes of organisms, where greater abundances are expected in landscapes where different required habitat patches are within proximity to one another. the beneﬁts of an optimal spatial organisation of various essential habitats include a greater efﬁciency in collecting resources, as well as minimal exposure to predators when an organism travels from one habitat to another (dunning et al. 1992). the importance of the spatial organisation of ﬁsh habitat has been emphasised in other studies of ﬁsh ecology as well (e.g., kocik & ferreri 1998; isaak et al. 2007; le pichon et al. 2009). furthermore, our model demonstrates how the population size and production of an organism is partially controlled by large-scale physical parameters, namely the character of river valley segments at the scale of 103 to 105 m. these ﬁndings support fausch et al.’s (2002) argument that habitat controls on ﬁsh populations must be examined at larger spatial scales, as these are the scales at which many important and complementary ecological processes occur. in a sim- ilar study on atlantic salmon rivers in maine, sweka & mackey (2010) showed how parr densities in a river reach decrease with increasing cumulative drainage area. although their model did not account for habitat complementation, sweka & mackey’s (2010) study serves as another example of how large-scale charac- teristics of the landscape can be used to predict the potential productive capacity of a reach. additionally, such large-scale characteristics have the added beneﬁt 153 fig. 8. the average size of the annual salmon runs as a function of the total length of optimally productive habitat for 14 watersheds in the gaspe peninsula (n: nouvelle, pp: petit pabos, gp: grand pabos, mb: malbaie). for the average number of returning multi-sea-year salmon (r2 = 0.881, p < 0.0005), although the pre- dictive power the average number of returning grilses (r2 = 0.637, p = 0.001). is slightly weaker for discussion our results are consistent with the view that the spatial organisation of the different types of habitat is an important factor controlling the overall production of salmon in a river. our ﬁndings suggest that each study river has a unique ‘bar code’ of segment types, lengths and sequencing (cf. fig. 7) that appears to explain differences in productivity (ward 1997). it the limited redd and parr abundance data available in our 14 study systems, combined with ecological observations from other salmon systems led us to hypothesise that potential spawning habitat in gaspe rivers is most productive if is located within approximately 15 km upstream of a bc segment. we also hypothesise that the importance of bc segments is due to their heavy use for both resting of migrating spawners and rearing of older parr that emerge from upstream redds. note that um segments in particular are generally poor in boulders and parr habitat, so that to survive and grow to pre-smolt stage, fry emerging from such redds located in ‘optimal segments’ are hypothesised to migrate downstream to bouldery habitats concentrated in the next downstream bc or lcm segment. in ‘optimal segments’, the latter are, by deﬁnition, located less than 15 km downstream. note, however, that fry emerging from redds located in lcm segments have, as they grow, much closer access to the kim & lapointe of being easily measured from ofﬁce-based data sources, such as gis, or (in our study) topographic maps and aerial photographs. a key practical and theoretical feature of our segment scale model of habitat productivity is that it does not require extensive ﬁeld-based data or high spatial resolution, reach scale imagery to quantify the amount of optimally productive habitat in a watershed, and yet it can be used to relatively accurately predict speciﬁc run sizes in this region. in particular, no detailed information is required on channel bed grain sizes beyond information on occurrences of large boulders visible on 1:15,000 air photos and inferable from valley setting. some of the variance in the salmon runs left unexplained by our riverscape metric may be due to two main factors. the ﬁrst relates to the coarse spatial scale and highly simpliﬁed assumptions underlying our productivity metric. our model focuses on river segments where the bulk of the watershed’s salmon production is believed to be concentrated. although we hypothesise that the remainder of the river network contributes substantially less to the overall production of salmon in the watershed, we recognise that these remaining segments are not completely unproductive. the exclusion of these segments likely accounts for unexplained variance in our model, but our metric for identifying optimally productive river segments is nevertheless successful in explaining an extremely large portion of the variability in salmon runs across the gaspe peninsula. a second source of variance may also be introduced by differential exposure to preda- tion and survival during the smolt-to-adult stage. upon leaving freshwater, predation is an important source of mortality for salmon, especially during their migration through estuaries and fjords (hansen & quinn 1998). differences species composition and populations from one estuary to the next may therefore result in differential survival rates of salmon across the the gaspe peninsula that different watersheds of cannot be measured from our riverscape model. in predator finally, it is important to note that the effectiveness of this model for predicting salmon run sizes may be highly speciﬁc to the particular physiography of gaspe rivers, where repeated bc segments incised in friable bedrock lithologies are frequent. atlantic salmon spawn in rivers draining into the north atlantic ocean, the norwegian sea and the barents sea, and these rivers vary substantially in their parent geology, the salmon’s growing season, etc. (elliott et al. 1998). it can be assumed that such bcs may not play such a prominent role in a number of salmon regions. in fact, davey & lapointe (2007) show that the most common and repeated boulder sources along salmon rivers in the canadian shield, north of the gaspe, are topography, length of river lengths, 154 valley bottom boulder deposits of ﬂuvioglacial origin underlying river rapids (a segment type generally devoid of deep pool habitat along with bedrock falls). as a result, we assume that the landscape ecology is best applied model described in this paper the gaspe speciﬁcally to the salmon rivers of peninsula. also, while optimally productive habitat in gaspe rivers is believed to be concentrated within the ﬁrst 15 km upstream of a bc segment, this distance limit may vary in other watersheds depend- ing on the overall swimming strength and endurance of their salmon populations. management implications the signiﬁcant correlation between the average annual salmon run sizes and the total lengths of optimally productive habitat as deﬁned here indicates that the spatial organisation of the different types of geomor- phic segments is an important limiting factor control- ling the overall production of salmon in a watershed. this suggests that stocking a river with salmon may not prove to be effective at boosting the salmon population, as unbalanced habitat composition or poor connectivity between the different types of habitat may result in high mortality rates (schlosser 1995; jurajda et al. 2004). however, attempts to artiﬁcially improve through in-stream works the composition and connec- tivity of the different types of geomorphic segments, while theoretically possible, will likely be logistically and ﬁnancially challenging as this would require heavy alteration of the river bed sediments and valley morphology. for example, boosting salmon popula- tions in rivers with very long (e.g. >25 km) distances separating consecutive bc segments might require, among other things, the creation of deep pools and the introduction of numerous large boulders at multiple points along the river. as discussed by coulombe- pontbriand & lapointe (2004b), the artiﬁcial intro- duction of sparse boulders into a cobble channel may only prove to be a temporary solution, as these isolated boulders should, over time, migrate and be lost in pools or buried by point bar accretion as the cobble channel migrates across the valley bottom. con- versely, rivers that are dominated by bc segments, and which therefore lack enough segments with gravel- to cobble-sized sediment needed for spawning activity, cannot economically be re-supplied with enough optimal spawning substrate to substantially boost spawning activity along their entire lengths. such an artiﬁcial introduction of spawning substrate will also prove to be only a temporary solution, as subsequent ﬂooding events may reshape the channel and reorganise the substrate, which in turn alters the quality and use of the newly created habitat (kondolf & micheli 1995). regional variability in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) riverscapes acknowledgements the authors wish to thank the ministe`re des ressources naturelles et de la faune du quebec (mrnf) and the various zecs (zone d’exploitation controˆlee) of the gaspe peninsula for sharing their data on salmon counts and habitat assessments; special thanks to martin dorais and alain lehoux of the mrnf for providing invaluable assistance with the biological data. comments from john kocik and an anonymous reviewer greatly enhanced the quality of this manuscript. this study was a contribution to the centre interuniversitaire de recherche sur le saumon atlantique (cirsa). funding was provided by geo- ide and nserc research grants. m. kim was also supported by a master’s (b1) research scholarship provided by the fonds quebecois de la recherche sur la nature et les technologies (fqrnt). references bardonnet, a. & baglinie`re, j.-l. 2000. freshwater habitat of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 57: 497–506. bujold, v., cunjak, r.a., dietrich, j.p. & courtemanche, d.a. 2004. drifters versus resident fry: assessing size and age differences in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) fry. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 273–282. burnett, k.m., reeves, g.h., miller, d.j., clarke, s., vance- borland, k. & christiansen, k. 2007. distribution of salmon- habitat potential relative to landscape characteristics and implications for conservation. ecological applications 17: 66–80. caron, f., fontaine, p.m. & cauchon, v. 2006. e´ tat des stocks de saumon au quebec en 2005. quebec city: ministe`re des ressources naturelles et de la faune. 19 pp. coulombe-pontbriand, m. & lapointe, m. 2004a. geomorphic controls, rifﬂe substrate quality, and spawning site selection in two semi-alluvial salmon rivers in the gaspe peninsula, canada. river research and applications 20: 577–590. coulombe-pontbriand, m. & lapointe, m. 2004b. landscape controls on boulder-rich, winter habitat availability and their effects on atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) parr abundance in two ﬁfth-order mountain streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 648–658. crisp, d.t. 1996. environmental requirements of common riverine european salmonid ﬁsh species in fresh water with particular reference to physical and chemical aspects. hyd- robiologia 323: 201–221. crisp, d.t. & carling, p.a. 1989. observations on siting, dimensions and structure of salmonid redds. journal of fish biology 34: 119–134. cunjak, r.a. 1988. behavior and microhabitat of young atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) during winter. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 45: 2156–2160. davey, c. & lapointe, m. 2007. sedimentary links and the spatial organization of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) spawning habitat in a canadian shield river. geomorphology 83: 82–96. desjardins, m., frenette, y., belanger, j. & hetu, b. 1999. histoire de la gaspesie. sainte-foy: institut quebecois de recherche sur la culture. 795 pp. dunning, j.b., danielson, b.j. & pulliam, h.r. 1992. ecolog- ical processes that affect populations in complex landscapes. oikos 65: 169–175. elliott, s.r., coe, t.a., helﬁeld, j.m. & naiman, r.j. 1998. spatial variation in environmental characteristics of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) rivers. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 267–280. fausch, k.d., torgersen, c.e., baxter, c.v. & li, h.w. 2002. landscapes to riverscapes: bridging the gap between research and conservation of stream fishes. bioscience 52: 483–498. ferguson, r. & ashworth, p. 1991. slope-induced changes in channel character along a gravel-bed stream: the allt dubhaig, scotland. earth surface processes and landforms 16: 65–82. ferguson, r., hoey, t., wathen, s. & werrity, a. 1996. field evidence for rapid downstream ﬁning of river gravels through selective transport. geology 24: 179–182. flather, c.h. & bevers, m. 2002. patchy reaction-diffusion and population abundance: the relative importance of habitat amount and arrangement. the american naturalist 159: 40– 56. freeman, m.c. & grossman, g.d. 1993. effects of habitat availability on dispersion of a stream cyprinid. environmen- tal biology of fishes 37: 121–130. frissell, c.a., liss, w.j., warren, c.e. & hurley, m.d. 1986. a hierarchical framework for stream habitat classiﬁcation: viewing streams in a watershed context. environmental management 10: 199–214. gibson, r.j. 1993. the atlantic salmon in fresh water: spawning, rearing and production. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 3: 39–73. hansen, l.p. & quinn, t.p. 1998. the marine phase of the atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) life cycle, with comparison to paciﬁc salmon. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 104–118. hawkins, a.d. & smith, g.w. 1986. radio-tracking observa- tions on atlantic salmon ascending the aberdeenshire dee. scottish fisheries research report no. 36, 24 pp. heggenes, j. & saltveit, s.j. 1990. seasonal and spatial microhabitat selection and segregation in young atlantic salmon, salmo_salar l., and brown_trout, salmo_trutta l., in a norwegian river. journal of fish biology 36: 707–720. isaak, d.j., thurow, r.f., rieman, b.e. & dunham, j.b. 2007. chinook salmon use of spawning patches: relative roles of habitat quality, size, and connectivity. ecological applica- tions 17: 352–364. johnston, t.a. 1997. downstream movements of young-of-the- year ﬁshes in catamaran brook and the little southwest miramichi river, new brunswick. journal of fish biology 51: 1047–1062. jurajda, p., ondracˇkova´, m. & reichard, m. 2004. managed ﬂooding as a tool for supporting natural ﬁsh reproduction in man-made lentic water bodies. fisheries management and ecology 11: 237–242. kim, m.s. 2009. the controls of sedimentary links on the spatial distribution of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) juveniles and spawning activity along rivers in the gaspe peninsula, canada. msc thesis. montreal, quebec: mcgill university, 141 pp. 155 river. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 41: 469–475. schlosser, i.j. 1991. stream ﬁsh ecology: a landscape perspec- tive. bioscience 41: 704–712. schlosser, i.j. 1995. critical landscape attributes that inﬂuence ﬁsh population dynamics in headwater streams. hydrobiolo- gia 303: 71–81. secteur faune quebec. 2010. bilan de l’exploitation du saumon au quebec, 282 pp. seelbach, p.w., wiley, m.j., kotanchik, j.c. & baker, m.e. 1997. a landscape-based ecological classiﬁcation system for river valley segments in lower michigan (mi-vsec version 1.0). michigan department of natural resources, fisheries division, fisheries research report 2036, ann arbor, 51 pp. sweka, j.a. & mackey, g. 2010. a functional relationship between watershed size and atlantic salmon parr density. journal of fish and wildlife management 1: 3–10. torgersen, c.e., baxter, c.v. & li, h.w. 2006. landscape inﬂuences on longitudinal patterns of river ﬁshes: spatially continuous analysis of ﬁsh-habitat relationships. in: hughes, r., wang, l. & wofford, j.e., eds. inﬂuences of landscapes on stream habitats and biological assemblages: american fisheries society symposium. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 473–492. valdimarsson, s.k. & metcalfe, n.b. 1998. shelter selection in juvenile atlantic salmon, or why do salmon seek shelter in winter? journal of fish biology 52: 42–49. wankowski, j.w.j. & thorpe, j.e. 1979. spatial distribution and feeding in atlantic salmon, salmo_salar l., juveniles. journal of fish biology 14: 239–247. ward, j.v. 1997. an expansive perspective of riverine landscapes: pattern and process across scales. gaia 6: 52–60. webb, j.h., fryer, r.j., taggart, j.b., thompson, c.e. & youngson, a.f. 2001. dispersion of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) fry from competing families as revealed by dna proﬁling. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 58: 2386–2395. kim & lapointe kocik, j.f. & ferreri, c.p. 1998. juvenile production variation in salmonids: population dynamics, habitat, and the role of spatial relationships. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 44: 191–200. kondolf, g.m. & micheli, e.r. 1995. evaluating stream restoration projects. environmental management 19: 1–15. kondolf, g.m. & wolman, m.g. 1993. the sizes of salmonid spawning gravels. water resources research 29: 2275– 2285. le pichon, c., gorges, g., baudry, j., goreaud, f. & boe¨t, p. 2009. spatial metrics and methods for riverscapes: quantify- ing variability in riverine ﬁsh habitat patterns. environmetrics 20: 512–526. moir, h.j., soulsby, c. & youngson, a. 1998. hydraulic and sedimentary characteristics of habitat utilized by atlantic salmon for spawning in the girnock burn, scotland. fisheries management and ecology 5: 241–254. montgomery, d.r. & bufﬁngton, j.m. 1997. channel-reach morphology in mountain drainage basins. bulletin of the geological society of america 109: 596–611. morantz, d.l., sweeney, r.k., shirvell, c.s. & longard, d.a. 1987. selection of microhabitat in summer by juvenile atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 44: 120–129. parker, g. 1991. selective sorting and abrasion of river gravel. ii: applications. journal of hydraulic engineering 117: 150–171. landscape ecology: addressing uniqueness within the river discontinuum. freshwater biol- ogy 47: 641–660. poole, g.c. 2002. fluvial rice, s. & church, m. 1998. grain size along two gravel-bed rivers: statistical variation, spatial pattern and sedimentary links. earth surface processes and landforms 23: 345–363. rice, s.p. & church, m. 2001. longitudinal proﬁles in simple alluvial systems. water resources research 37: 417–426. rimmer, d.m., paim, u. & saunders, r.l. 1984. changes in the selection of microhabitat by juvenile atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) at the summer-autumn transition in a small 156  