ecology of freshwater fish 2003: 12: 118–126 printed in denmark  all rights reserved copyright # blackwell munksgaard 2003 habitat–predator association and avoidance in rainbowﬁsh (melanotaenia spp.) brown c. habitat–predator association and avoidance in rainbowﬁsh (melanotaenia spp.). ecology of freshwater fish 2003: 12: 118–126. # blackwell munksgaard, 2003 abstract – the ability to recall the location of a predator and later avoid it was tested in nine populations of rainbowfish (melanotaenia spp.), representing three species from a variety of environments. following the introduction of a model predator into a particular microhabitat, the model was removed, the arena rotated and the distribution of the fish recorded again. in this manner it could be determined what cues the fish relied on in order to recall the previous location of the predator model. fish from all populations but one (dirran creek) were capable of avoiding the predator by remembering either the location and/or the microhabitat in which the predator was recently observed. reliance on different types of visual cues appears to vary between populations but the reason for this variation remains elusive. of the ecological variables tested (flow variability, predator density and habitat complexity), only the level of predation appeared to be correlated with the orientation technique employed by each population. there was no effect of species identity, which suggests that the habitat that each population occupies plays a strong role in the development of both predator avoidance responses and the cues used to track predators in the wild. culum brown department of zoology and entomology, university of queensland, brisbane, australia 4072 current address: institute of cell, animal and population biology, university of edinburgh, eh9 3jt uk; tel.: þ44 1316508667; fax: þ44 1316506564; e-mail: culumbrown@yahoo.com key words: predator avoidance; rainbowfish; ecology; cue use; habitat culum brown, institute of cell, animal and population biology, university of edinburgh, eh9 3jt uk; tel.: þ44 1316508667; fax: þ44 1316506564; e-mail: culumbrown@yahoo.com accepted for publication october 14, 2002 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´ s del texto principal de este artı´ culo. introduction prey often face predators that can be found in certain areas (e.g. particular microhabitats) and/ or at certain times of the day (reebs 2000). many piscivorous ﬁsh species are often found in parti- cular microhabitats. mary river cod (maccullo- chella peelii mariensis rowland), for example, often occupy the same snag (i.e. fallen timber) that they defend rigorously and return to even after lengthy migrations (simpson & mapleston 2002). mouth almighty (glossamia aprion), major predators of rainbowﬁsh, are always found in areas that are structurally complex, especially among dense weed beds (hattori & warburton 2002). one would expect, therefore, that prey species would avoid speciﬁc locations and/or microhabitats commonly occupied by predators in order to reduce the risk of encountering them. minnows (pimephales promelas) learn to associate 118 alarm substances with high-risk habitats and later avoid such areas, even when the alarm substance or predator odour is no longer present (chivers & smith 1994, 1995). chivers & smith suggest that, in clear, ﬂowing water, ﬁsh probably rely heavily on vision to identify dangerous habitats. simi- larly, huntingford & wright (1989) showed that sticklebacks (gasterosteus aculeatus) are capable of avoiding foraging patches associated with ele- vated predation risk, and that the ability to learn varies between populations, perhaps due to the level of predation risk experienced in their site of origin (magurran 1990). there is now a great deal of literature regarding how animals locate objects within their environ- ment (for reviews see gallistel 1990 and healy 1998). in laboratory experiments ﬁsh appear to use one of the three methods to navigate through the test environment. individuals may use speciﬁc location markers (local cues), remember the spa- tial relationship between a number of cues indi- cating the whereabouts of a particular location (global cues) or rely on a sequence of turns (algorithms) in order to reach their goal (hughes & blight 1999). the ways in which an animal’s ecology inﬂu- ences the orientation skills of individuals have only recently begun to receive the level of atten- tion they deserve (e.g. giraldeau 1997; dukas 1998). a number of navigation techniques may be employed depending on the past history of the animal and the nature of the spatial problems it commonly faces (braithwaite et al. 1996). we may expect that the environment in which animals develop may strongly affect the types of cues that are used for orientation (girvan & braithwaite 1998). it is conceivable that the types of cues used for orientation and navigation will depend on the level of stability in the environment (girvan & braithwaite 1998). environmental stochasticity may affect cue reliability. girvan & braithwaite (1998) found that sticklebacks from different locations (lake and river populations) relied on different cues to learn the location of a foraging patch. warburton (1990) suggested that reliance on local landmarks for orientation may also vary according to the nature and complexity of the visual environment. fish derived from structu- rally complex environments may not rely on local landmarks since cues would be lost amongst the visual clutter. this study attempted to address several ques- tions regarding population variation in the avoid- ance of dangerous locations and microhabitats in rainbowﬁsh (melanotaenia spp.). much is known about population variation in predator recogni- tion and avoidance in rainbowﬁsh already (brown & warburton 1997, 1999). the four speciﬁc ques- tions i wished to be addressed here are: (i) can rainbowﬁsh associate the presence of a predator with a particular location or microhabitat and subsequently avoid them? (ii) is the ability to avoid dangerous areas related to the predation habitat–predator association and avoidance pressure at the site of collection? (iii) do the various populations rely on different spatial cues to recall the whereabouts of predators and sub- sequently avoid dangerous microhabitats or loca- tions or both? (iv) is cue use related to the habitat variables at the site of collection (ﬂow variability, habitat complexity and predator abundance)? methods three species of rainbowﬁsh were chosen for this study: melanotaenia eachamensis, m. splendida and m. spp. nov. (utchee type; see mcguigan et al. 2000 for species details). three populations originating from slightly different environments (table 1) were collected for each species from eight locations in the atherton and region of northern queensland (see fig. 1 for a map of the sampling localities). a captive population of the lake eacham rainbowﬁsh, which had been main- tained in the laboratory, was also included in the experiment. the wild ﬁsh were air freighted to the university of queensland, and all ﬁsh were held in holding tanks measuring 60 cm 35 cm 40 cm. each tank contained approximately 40 ﬁsh, and the water was ﬁltered via under-gravel ﬁlters. light conditions were 12 l : 12 d, temperature was maintained at 248c and ph was close to neutral. all ﬁsh had adjusted to captive condi- tions for a month prior to the experiments, and readily accepted ﬂake food. only female ﬁsh were used during this experiment because they form the basis of many shoals and exhibit a relatively low amount of interindividual aggression. habitat variables at each locality, site descriptions were ﬁlled out which included information on land use, habitat complexity/availability, water quality and the level of disturbance (see pusey & kennard 1994 and pusey et al. 2000b for further details). from this information relative levels of habitat table1. a list of the populations used in this study, their species identity and habitat information. species m.eachamensis m.eachamensis m.eachamensis m.splendida m.splendida m.splendida utchee type utchee type utchee type population flow variability predator pressure habitat complexity lake eacham captive stock dirran creek upper south johnstone (usj) upper north johnstone (unj) lower south johnstone (lsj) ithica river short creek utchee creek fishes creek low moderate low moderate low moderate high moderate high low low low moderate high moderate low moderate high low high moderate high low moderate high high moderate flow variability was calculated from the size of the catchment upstream of the collection site.the level of predation pressure was calculated both from visual observation and from survey data, and represents the abundance of potential piscivorous predators at each location. habitat complexity represents a summary score for10 habitat variables. see methods section for further details. 119 brown complexity were calculated by adding up the total amount of refuge available for the ﬁsh at each site. a combination of 10 refuge types including the amount of overhanging vegetation, in-stream vegetation, overhanging banks, substrate type, substrate leaf litter, fallen timbers, etc. were scaled from 1 to 3, 3 being most abundant. the refuge scores were summed. sites with totals between 0 and 10 were allocated as low habitat structural complexity, scores between 10 and 20 were deﬁned as intermediate habitat complexity and scores between 20 and 30 were deﬁned as highly complex. predator density information was gained from a combination of seine netting, visual observation (including snorkelling) and personal communication with dr brad pusey, grifﬁth university, brisbane, australia. pusey and col- leagues have conducted several in-depth ﬁsh fauna surveys in the region and performed gut contents analyses on rainbowﬁsh and their pre- dators (pusey et al. 1995a,b; pusey & kennard 1996; pusey et al. 2000a). stream ﬂow data from six sites within the north and south johnstone rivers were obtained from the department of natural resources, queens- land, australia. the locations selected had between 30 and 80 years of ﬂow data. since ﬂow variability (measured by the monthly standard 120 fig. 1. the site locations of the popula- tions examined: 1, upper north johnstone river; 2, upper south johnstone river; 3, lower south johnstone river; 4, dirran creek; 5, short creek; 6, utchee creek; 7, fisher creek and 8, ithica river. lake eacham is also marked on the map. correlated with catchment variation about the mean annual ﬂow rate) is highly size (r2¼ 0.811; n¼ 6; p < 0.001) and stream ﬂow information was not available for every collection site, a ﬂow variability index was estimated for each collection site by calculating the catchment area upstream of the collection sites. sites with catchment areas over 120 km2 upstream were considered to have low ﬂow variability (as was the captive stock originally from lake eacham). sites with catchment areas between 20 and 100 km2 upstream were considered to have mod- erate ﬂow variability. sites with catchment areas under 20 km2 upstream were considered to have high ﬂow variability. see table 1 for a summary of the habitat variables for each site. experimental apparatus a large experimental tank (95 cm 95 cm) was divided into four quadrants each containing a different habitat type. all sides of the tank were lined with white perspex and the bottom rested on white polystyrene. one quadrant contained ﬁne branches made from plastic straws (snag), one contained artiﬁcial submerged aquatic weed (plas- tic strips of garbage bags attached to a plastic mesh), another contained river rocks (cleaned and washed prior to use) and the last contained no structure. the quadrants were numbered from 1 to 4 and allocated a habitat type based on a predetermined table. this eliminated any possible habitat–location bias. water depth was main- tained at 25 cm and at a temperature of 24 8c. the tank was surrounded by white cloth on three sides and across the roof. the fourth side was a white wall to which a camera was anchored to an arm that extended over the top of the tank. four ﬂuorescent tubes provided the lighting directly overhead. the light was diffused through the cloth to provide even light conditions within the entire enclosure. experimental protocol groups of ﬁve ﬁsh were selected at random from the holding tanks and placed into the experimen- tal arena. the ﬁsh were allowed 20 min to settle into the new environment before recoding began. for a period of 75 min, the locations of each ﬁsh was noted every 5 min. at the end of that time the preferred habitat type was determined and a model predator placed into that quadrant. a predator model (see brown & warburton 1997 for details of the model) of a mouth almighty, glossamia aprion, was attached to an overhead system of pulleys and elastic that allowed the observer to move the model towards any ﬁsh entering the preferred habitat. the model was introduced for 30 min during which the beha- viour and location of the ﬁsh was recorded. the model was then removed and the tank rotated 908 in order to control for the possibility that the ﬁsh were relying on global cues (multiple cues lying outside the arena, for example the camera anchor) rather than avoiding the microhabitat (local cues) containing the predator. following rotation of the experimental tank, the ﬁsh were allowed to settle for a further 10 min, and their location was then recorded for another 75-min period. the procedure was repeated eight times per popula- tion, thus a total of 40 ﬁsh were used per popula- tion. the proportion of time the ﬁsh spent in each habitat was recorded for the periods ‘before’, ‘during’ and ‘after’ the presentation of the model predator. the amount of time spent in the pre- ferred habitat during exposure to the model and following the removal of the model and rotation of the tank was expressed as a proportion of the time spent in the preferred habitat before the ﬁsh were exposed to the model predator (i.e. during/ before 100, after/before 100 for the periods ‘during’ and ‘after’, respectively). data were arc-sine transformed and analysed independently habitat–predator association and avoidance for an effect of species identity, population, pre- dator pressure, habitat complexity and stream ﬂow variability using repeated measures analysis of variance. results the results of the repeated measures tests sug- gested that there was no effect of species identity, the level of habitat complexity, ﬂow variability or predation pressure at the collection sites on the tendency of the ﬁsh to avoid the dangerous micro- habitat (table 2a) or location (i.e. using global cues; table 3a) which was contained with the predator model prior to the rotation of the experi- mental tank. in all cases, however, there was a highly signiﬁcant time effect (p < 0.0001) primar- ily due to the large decrease in occupation of the preferred habitat while the predator was present (fig. 2). most of the populations avoided the ‘dangerous’ microhabitat, with the exception of the dirran creek ﬁsh and ﬁsh from both the upper and lower south johnstone river (although the latter two were marginal; p < 0.06; table 2b). it should be noted that the lower south johnstone table 2a. the results of a repeated measures anova analysis of microhabitat avoidance following the removal of the model and rotation of the experimental tank. effect population species predators habitat complexity flow variability d.f. 8 2 2 2 2 f-value 0.456 0.168 0.220 0.409 0.081 p-value 0.882 0.846 0.803 0.666 0.922 in all cases p< 0.0001for the time effect reflecting a strong change in the level of occupancy of the preferred habitat following the introduction and subsequent re- moval of the predator model.none of the habitat variable adequately account for the avoidance responses shown by the fish. table 2b. a summary of a repeated measures anova analysis of mircohabitat avoidance by population following the removal of the model and rotation of the experimental tank. population upper north johnstone captive dirran fishers ithica lower south johnstone short upper south jonstone utchee d.f. 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 f-ratio 27.565 11.442 2.911 10.729 7.225 5.409 12.597 5.439 20.706 p-value 0.0012 0.0117 0.1317 0.0136 0.0312 0.0529 0.0094 0.0525 0.0026 dirran creek showed the poorest avoidance of the preferred habitat following the introduction of the model. both lower and upper south johnstone fish showed sta- tistically marginal avoidance whilst the remaining populations all showed strong avoidance of the habitat that once contained the predator model. 121 brown table 3a. the results of a repeated measures anova analysis of quadrant avoid- ance following the removal of the model and rotation of the experimental tank. effect population species predators habitat complexity flow variability d.f. 8 2 2 2 2 f-ratio 0.147 0.399 0.521 0.014 0.039 p-value 0.997 0.673 0.596 0.986 0.962 in all cases p< 0.0001for the time effect. none of the habitat variable adequately account for the avoidance of the location of the model shown by the fish. ﬁsh showed a very strong avoidance response while the predator was present but rapidly reoc- cupied the preferred habitat once the predator was removed (fig. 2). fishers, ithica, lower south johnstone and utchee also avoided the location that the model occupied prior to rotation (table 3b). all of these populations are exposed to high or moderate levels of predation pressure (table 1). these results suggest that these latter populations were relying on global cues as well as local cues to avoid both the high-risk location and microhabitat. it is clear that the introduction of the predator to the initially preferred habitat/quadrant caused a signiﬁcant decline in the occupancy of this habitat/ quadrant in most populations (fig. 2). dirran creek, short creek and upper south johnstone river ﬁsh by contrast did not show a change in habitat occupancy (table 4b). all three of these table 3b. a summary of a repeated measures anova analysis of quadrant avoid- ance by population following the removal of the model and rotation of the experi- mental tank. population upper north johnstone captive dirran fishers ithica lower south johnstone short upper south jonstone utchee d.f. 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 f-ratio 2.308 2.522 3.871 20.396 6.868 47.560 3.195 2.984 6.593 p-value 0. 1725 0.1563 0.0898 0.0027 0.0344 0.0002 0.1170 0.1277 0.0371 four of populations showed statistically significant avoidance of the location of the predator.the remaining populations showed only a slight avoidance of the location of the model. populations contain very few predators in the wild (table 1). generally, the strength of the avoidance response increased with the level of predation pressure at the collection sites. if data from mode- rate and high predator populations are combined we ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences compared with ﬁsh from low predator regimes (d.f.¼ 1; f¼ 4.623; p¼ 0.035; fig. 3). interestingly, there was also a week negative relationship between the avoidance response and the level of habitat complexity at the collection sites. however, this effect may be due to the correlation between habitat variables. follow- ing removal of the predator model and rotation of the tank, a general trend to move back into the preferred habitat and quadrant is evident (fig. 2). fig. 2. the amount of time spent in various quadrants relative to the amount of time spent in the preferred microhabitat before the introduction of the predator model. the amount of time spent in the preferred habitat before the introduction of the predator is equal to 100%. ‘during’ refers to the amount of time spent in the habitat containing the predator model during exposure. ‘h(after)’ and ‘q(after)’ refer to the proportion of time spent in the microhabitat and quadrant (location) that contained the model prior to its removal and the rotation of the experimental arena. fish using global cues should avoid the location that previously contained the threat. fish utilising local cues should avoid the microhabitat that contained the threat. error bars represent standard error. the first three populations listed are melanotaenia eachamensis, the second three m. splendida and the final three are the utchee-type rainbowfish. 122 table 4a. the results of a repeated measures analysis of predator avoidance as defined by the change in occupancy of the preferred habitat during the presence of the predator model. effect population species predators habitat complexity flow variability d.f. 8 2 2 2 2 f-ratio 0.962 1.232 2.396 1.064 0.144 p-value 0.473 0.298 0.098 0.351 0.866 only the level of predation pressure at the sites explained come of the variability on the data. table 4b. a summary of a repeated measures analysis of predator avoidance by each population as defined by the change in occupancy of the preferred habitat during the presence of the predator model. population upper north johnstone captive dirran fishers ithica lower south johnstone short upper south jonstone utchee d.f. 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 f-ratio 27.756 32.329 3.528 102.520 16.757 58.735 5.447 11.185 54.532 p-value 0.0012 0.0007 0.1024 <0.0001 0.0046 0.0001 0.0523 0.0123 0.0002 all populations showed strong avoidance of the predator model with the exception of dirran creek fish. fish from short creek showed a statistically marginal avoid- ance response. fig. 3. the relative decrease in occupancy of the preferred habitat following the introduction of the model predator. data have been lumped for fish collected from sites with high and moderate levels of predation. error bars represent standard error. discussion strong avoidance of dangerous habitats has been reported previously in sticklebacks (huntingford & wright 1989) and galaxiids (reebs 2000), and appears to be a common ability among many habitat–predator association and avoidance rainbowﬁsh populations. rainbowﬁsh from all but three test populations were capable of using visual cues to associate predators with either the location (global cues) or the microhabitat (local cues) that the predator was last encountered in. one of these three was the dirran creek popula- tion. the dirran creek ﬁsh did not avoid the habitat the predator was located in, even with the presence of the predator model. this poor avoid- ance response by dirran creek ﬁsh has been reported previously (brown & warburton 1997), and may stem from long-term isolation from predators. dirran creek has a long series of rapids and waterfalls before ﬂowing into the north johnstone river that would act as a sub- stantial barrier to large predatory ﬁsh species. the other populations that showed poor avoidance behaviour were the upper and lower south john- stone ﬁsh. like the dirran creek ﬁsh, the upper south johnstone ﬁsh also have virtually no pisci- vorous predators; however, their lack of avoid- ance of the dangerous habitat was only marginally (p¼ 0.053; table 2b). these ﬁsh insigniﬁcant showed a strong avoidance response while the predator was present but quickly reoccupied their preferred habitat once the threat had been removed. the lower south johnstone ﬁsh showed a similar marginal avoidance of the dangerous microhabitat following the removal of the pre- dator (p¼ 0.053; table 2b), but strongly avoided the microhabitat containing the predator model while it was present (fig. 2). there was a strong overall trend towards increasing avoidance of the dangerous habitat as the level of predation threat experienced at each site increased. by combining the high and moderate predator populations a signiﬁcant effect of predation level on habitat avoidance emerges. these data may be explained in two ways. firstly, predator-naı¨ ve populations may show poor avoidance responses while the predator is present and barely alter their use of the preferred habitat at all (e.g. dirran and short creek). secondly, predator-naı¨ ve ﬁsh may also reoccupy the dan- gerous habitat very quickly, once the disturbance is removed (e.g. the captive lake eacham and upper south johnstone populations). this latter response on it’s own, however, is not necessarily indicative of predator regimes since many of the other populations show similar rates of reoccupa- tion (e.g. lower south johnstone river). the initial avoidance response displayed by populations from areas containing low predation pressure while the predator was present in the arena was signiﬁcantly less than that of popula- tions from sites with both high and moderate predation pressure. this suggests a fundamental 123 brown difference in the antipredator behaviours dis- played by populations that are relatively predator naı¨ ve compared with predator-wary populations. population differences arising from site-speciﬁc differences in predation pressure are common amongst many ﬁsh species (guppies, minnows, sticklebacks, etc.), and has been observed in other species of rainbowﬁsh in previous experiments (brown & warburton 1997, 1999) four of the nine populations also showed sig- niﬁcant avoidance of the location housing the model, following its removal and rotation of the experimental arena, indicating the use of global (or extra maze) cues. these populations all came from areas with moderate and high levels of predation. fish from three populations avoided both the habitat and the quadrant indi- cating that they relied on both global and local cues to avoid the location of the predator (i.e. they avoided both the location and microhabitat). these populations were the only populations that lived sympatrically with sooty grunter (hephaes- tus sp.), a highly mobile predator. it may be that ﬁsh from areas containing large numbers of mobile predators cannot rely on a single cue type alone to track predators, and must remember both the location and the type of microhabitat within which the predators were last observed. many of the ﬁsh gradually moved back into the microhabitat or quadrant that contained the pre- dator, once it had been removed. fish from ithica, fishers and utchee creek, in particular, showed the greatest reoccupation rate following the removal of the predator. all three creeks are relatively small and had moderate-to-high levels of predation pressure, ﬂow variability and habitat complexity. in these streams it may be fairly costly to avoid a location for extended periods especially if the location of predators and prey items is temporally and/or spatially unpredictable. it may, under theses circumstances, pay to take a risk in order to gain access to foraging opportu- nities, particularly for rainbowﬁsh, which rely on drifting invertebrates as a primary food source. unlike previous studies, the data presented here suggest that reliance on various cue types does not vary signiﬁcantly with habitat stability as pro- posed by girvan & braithwaite (1998). nor was there strong evidence to suggest that the level of habitat complexity played a role in cue reliance (cf. warburton 1990). however, the data do sug- gest that local landmarks (i.e. speciﬁc aspects of microhabitat structure) were utilised more often than global cues (i.e. cues indicating the general location) in orientation behaviour by most rain- bowﬁsh populations. at this stage it remains unclear why some populations rely on global cues 124 while others rely on local cues or a combination of the two, although predator regimes may go some of the way in explaining these differences. perhaps one confounding problem with this experiment is the relationship between the habitat variables examined. predators were typically found in the lower reaches of the tributaries. these areas are also characterised by low water-ﬂow varia- bility and low habitat complexity. the reverse is true of the upper reaches. while nearly all of the populations contained a unique combination of the three habitat variables tested, it would require a great many more sample sites to rigorously investigate all of the possible permutations. one thing that all test populations do have in common is that they live in relatively clear water. studies conducted by warburton (1990) suggest that goldﬁsh (carassius auratus) relied on cues outside the experimental tank to aid in forage patch orientation. it is possible that the ﬁsh used the arm of the camera as an external cue during this experiment and possibly daylight from the windows along one side of the room. sticklebacks (gaterosteus aculeatus) and goldﬁsh have also been shown to use a variety of cues for orientation (girvan & braithwaite 1998; lopez et al. 1999). recalling the location of a particular object is much easier (cognitively speaking) if it can be associated with a single local cue or beacon (e.g. a particular microhabitat) rather computa- tion based on the relationship between multiple global cues (zanforlin 1990). therefore, we would expect the majority of rainbowﬁsh to utilise local cues preferentially, and subsequently only avoid the dangerous microhabitat. this is especially the case when the reliable global cues lie outside the experimental arena, many of which were deliber- ately eliminated. it may well be that only a small number of ﬁsh were aware of objects lying outside of the arena, and therefore utilised them for orientation. perhaps in nature the relationship between global and local cues rarely contradict each other and individuals rely on a number of cues to navigate. it is clear from this experiment that rainbowﬁsh rely on visual cues for navigation but it is also likely that in the wild they would also use chemo- sensory cues associated with particular habitat types or localities. chemo-sensory cues are widely used by other ﬁsh species (huntingford & wright 1989; halvorsen & stabell 1990), but were delib- erately removed from this experiment. future experiments could aim at establishing the relative importance of cue types in rainbowﬁsh orienta- tion since many animals use a hierarchy of cues for orientation, switching from one cue to another as the need arises (able 1993). in summary, most populations of rainbowﬁsh tested were capable of avoiding dangerous habi- tats by remembering either the location and/or the microhabitat where a predator was last observed. reliance on different types of cues appears to vary between populations but the reason for this var- iation remains elusive and does not appear to be related, at least in a simple way, to species iden- tity, environmental variability or habitat com- plexity. the presence or absence of predators and perhaps even the identity of the predators at each location may explain some of the variation observed between populations. in many of the populations the avoidance of the dangerous habi- tat or location began to decay straight after the model predator was removed. long-term avoid- ance probably requires constant negative reinfor- cement to offset potential foraging gains. resumen 1. la habilidad para recordar la localizacio´ n de un predador y posteriormente, rechazar la localidad fue examinada en nueve poblaciones de melanotaenia spp., representadas por tres especies en una variedad de ambientes. 2. despues de introducir un predador-modelo en un micro- habitat particular, el predador-modelo fue extraido, la arena removida y la distribucio´ n del pez observada de nuevo. de esta manera pudimos determinar las sen˜ ales que detecta el pez para recordar la localizacion previa del predador. los peces de todas las poblaciones excepto una (el rio dirran) fueron capaces de rechazar al predador recordando la loca- lidad y/o el microhabitat en el que el predador fue previa- mente observado. la dependencia de diferentes tipos de sen˜ ales visuales parecen variar entre poblaciones pero la razo´ n u´ ltima de esta variacio´ n permanece elusiva. 3. de las variables ecologicas analizadas (variabilidad del caudal, densidad de predadores y complejidad del habitat), solamente el nivel de predacio´ n parecio´ correlacionado con la te´ cnica de orientacio´ n utilizada por cada poblacio´ n. no hubo efecto de la especie lo que sugiere que el habitat que ocupa cada poblacio´ n juegan un papel primordial en el desarrollo de la respuesta de rechazo al predador tanto como en las sen˜ ales utilizadas para detectar predadores en la naturaleza. acknowledgements i shall like to thank all the people who helped collect rain- bowﬁsh from the atherton tablelands, felicity jones, katrina mcguigan, brad pusey, mark kennard and others. i shall also like to thank my ph.d. supervisor, kevin war- burton, for his support. all of the work conducted in this experiment was done with the permission from the animal ethics committee of the university of queensland. references able, k.p. 1993. orientation cues used by migratory birds: a review of cue conflict experiments. trends in ecology and evolution 8: 367–371. braithwaite, v.a., armstrong, j.d., mcadam, h.m. & huntigford, f.a. 1996. can juvenile salmon use multiple habitat–predator association and avoidance cue systems in spatial learning? animal behaviour 51: 1409–1415. brown, c. & warburton, k. 1997. predator recognition and anti-predator responses in the rainbowfish, melanotaenia eachamensis. behavioural ecology and sociobiology 41: 61–68. brown, c. & warburton, k. 1999. differences in timidity and escape responses between predator-naı¨ ve and pre- dator-sympatric rainbowfish populations. ethology 105: 491–502. chivers, d.p. & smith, r.j.f. 1994. flathead minnows (pimephales promelas) learn to recognise chemical stimuli from high-risk habitats by the presence of alarm substance. behavioural ecology 6: 155–158. chivers, d.p. & smith, r.j.f. 1995. chemical recognition of risky habitats in cultural transmitted among flathead minnows, pimephales promelas (osteichthes, cyprinidae). ethology 99: 286–296. dukas, r. 1998. cognitive ecology. chicago: university of chicago press. gallistel, c.r. 1990. the organisation of learning. cam- bridge: mit press. giraldeau, l.a. 1997. ecology of information use. in: krebs, j.r. & davies, n.b., eds. behavioural ecology: an evolutionary approach, 4th edn. oxford: blackwells scientific, pp. 42–68. girvan, j.r. & braithwaite, v.a. 1998. population differences in spatial learning in three-spined sticklebacks. in: proceed- ings of the royal society of london series b. 265: 913–918. halvorsen, m. & stabell, o.b. 1990. homing behaviour of displaced stream dwelling trout. animal behaviour 39: 1089–1097. hattori, a. & warburton, k. 2003. microhabitat use by the in a subtropical rainbowfish, melanotaenia duboulayi, australian stream. journal of ethology 21: 15–22. healy, s.d. 1998. spatial representations in animals. oxford: oxford university press. hughes, r.n. & blight, c.m. 1999. algorithmic behaviour and spatial memory are used by two intertidal fish species to solve the radial maze. animal behaviour 58: 601–613. huntingford, f.a. & wright, p.j. 1989. how sticklebacks learn to avoid dangerous feeding patches. behavioural processes 19: 181–189. lopez, j.c., broglio, c., rodriguez, f., thinus-blanc, c. & salas, c. 1999. multiple spatial learning strategies in goldfish (carassius auratus). animal cognition 2: 109–120. magurran, a.e. 1990. the inheritance and development of minnow anti-predator behaviour. animal behaviour 39: 834–842. mcguigan, k., zhu, d., allen, g.r. & moritz, c. 2000. phylogenetic relationships and historical biogeography of melanotaeniid fishes in australia and new guinea. marine and freshwater research 51: 713–723. pusey, b.j., arthington, a.h. & read, m.g. 1995a. species richness and spatial variation in fish assemblage structure in two rivers of the wet tropics of northern queensland, australia. environmental biology of fishes 42: 181–199. pusey, b.j., arthington, a.h. & read, m.g. 2000a. the dry-season diet of freshwater fishes in monsoonal tropical rivers of cape york peninsula, australia. ecology of freshwater fish 9: 177–190. pusey, b.j. & kennard, m.j. 1994. the freshwater fish fauna of the wet tropics region of northern queens- land. internal report for the cooperative research centre for tropical rainforest ecology and manage- ment, cairns, australia. pusey, b.j. & kennard, m.j. 1996. species richness and geo- graphical variation in assemblage structure of the fresh- 125 brown water fish fauna of the wet tropics region of northern queensland. marine and freshwater research 47: 563–573. pusey, b.j., kennard, m.j. & arthington, a.h. 2000b. discharge variability and the development of predictive models relating stream fish assemblage structure to habitat in. northeastern australia. ecology of fresh- water fish 9: 30–50. pusey, b.j., read, m.g. & arthington, a.h. 1995b. the feeding ecology of fresh-water fishes in two rivers of the australian wet tropics. environmental biology of fishes 43: 85–103. reebs, s.g. 2000. time-place learning based on food but not on predation risk in a fish, the inanga (galaxias maculatus). ethology 105: 361–371. simpson, r.r. & mapleston, a.j. 2002. movements and habitat use by the endangered australian freshwater mary river cod, maccullochella peelii mariensis. environ- mental biology of fishes 65: 401–410. warburton, k. 1990. the use of local landmarks by foraging goldfish. animal behaviour 40: 500–505. zanforlin, m. 1990. perception, learning and biological evolution. ethology, ecology and evolution 2: 288–290. 126  