ecology of freshwater fish 2003: 12: 151–158 printed in denmark  all rights reserved copyright # blackwell munksgaard 2003 ontogenetic changes in the diet of the black-stripe minnow galaxiella nigrostriata (shipway, 1953) (galaxiidae) and the salamanderﬁsh lepidogalaxias salamandroides (mees, 1961) (lepidogalaxiidae) gill hs, morgan dl. ontogenic changes in the diet of the black-stripe minnow galaxiella nigrostriata (shipway, 1953) (galaxiidae) and the salamanderﬁsh lepidogalaxias salamandroides (mees, 1961) (lepidogalaxiidae). ecology of freshwater fish 2003: 12: 151–158. # blackwell munksgaard, 2003 h. s. gill, d. l. morgan centre for fish and fisheries research, school of biological sciences and biotechnology, murdoch university, murdoch 6150, western australia abstract – similarities in the diets of larval, juvenile and adult black-stripe minnow (galaxiella nigrostriata) and salamanderfish (lepidogalaxias salamandroides), collected from ephemeral pools in south-western australia during the mid-wet, late-wet and dry seasons, were assessed. during the mid-wet season, both intra- and interspecific competition for a diminishing food supply was minimised through differences in prey utilisation by the various developmental stages of both species. during the late-wet season, the pools contained only juvenile g. nigrostriata and juvenile and adult l. salamandroides, the diets of which were vastly different. a shift towards terrestrial fauna by g. nigrostriata and the ingestion of greater proportions of larger benthic prey taxa by l. salamandroides minimised interspecific competition for food at a time when densities of zooplanktors were rapidly declining. timing differences in the onset of aestivation ensures that no interspecific competition for food occurs during the dry season. key words: larvae; aestivation; resource partitioning; south-western australia h. s. gill, centre for fish and fisheries research, school of biological sciences and biotechnology, murdoch university, murdoch 6150, western australia; tel.: þ6108 9360 6322; fax: þ6108 9360 6303; e-mail: hgill@central.murdoch.edu.au accepted for publication december 17, 2002 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´ s del texto principal de este artı´ culo. introduction the southern acid peat ﬂat region of western australia, an area of low-lying, coastal heathland with peaty but sandy, porous soils, receives the majority of its rainfall between april and september (christensen 1982; pusey & bradshaw 1996). during rest of the year (i.e., the warm dry period between october and march), the water in the pools of the region can reach temperatures of 35 8c, and many pools become greatly reduced in size or are even dried up (morgan et al. 1995, 1998). furthermore, the water of these pools was often darkly stained and highly acidic (e.g., as low as ph 3.0) (pusey & bradshaw 1996; morgan et al. 1998). whilst the wetlands of the southern acid peat ﬂats appear to be an inhospitable environ- ment for teleosts, they contain all seven of the small freshwater ﬁshes endemic to south-western australia (allen 1989; morgan et al. 1998). 151 gill & morgan there are comprehensive data on the growth, reproductive biology, broad-scale habitat asso- ciations and diets for each of the small freshwater ﬁsh species endemic to south-western australia (see morgan et al. 1998 and references therein). although several of these studies, either impli- citly or explicitly, considered dietary overlap and/ or resource partitioning in discussions of compe- tition and community structure in the pools of the peat ﬂats, only two utilised statistical analyses on quantitative data to explore dietary overlap and partitioning in these pools (pusey & brad- shaw 1996; gill & morgan 1998). pusey & bradshaw (1996) utilised dietary data that was combined for ﬁsh of all sizes in each season, and described two guilds as being present in these pools. the ﬁrst guild comprised benthic/lower water column feeders, including the salamanderﬁsh (lepidogalaxias salamandroides) mees (lepidogalaxiidae), nightﬁsh (bostockia porosa) castelnau (percichthyidae), western pygmy perch (edelia vittata) shipway (nannoper- cidae). the other guild comprised upper water column/surface feeders, including the black- stripe minnow (galaxiella nigrostriata) shipway (galaxiidae), mud minnow (g. munda) mcdowall (galaxiidae) and balston’s pygmy perch (nan- natherina balstoni) regan (nannopercidae). in contrast to pusey & bradshaw (1996), gill & morgan (1998) employed multivariate techni- ques, namely classiﬁcation and ordination, on the dietary data for individuals of a single species (n. balstoni) to describe intraspeciﬁc variations and ontogenetic changes in the diet of that spe- cies. nannatherina balstoni exhibited a major shift in diet, from predominantly zooplanktors to ter- restrial fauna, that coincided with the attainment of full adult morphology at the end of the larval phase. these data further suggested that the diets of larvae at different developmental stages (i.e., preﬂexion, ﬂexion and postﬂexion) were different from each other. differences in the diet of various life history stages may be the result of extrinsic factors such as temporal variations in the abun- dance of certain prey taxa and/or intrinsic fac- tors, including the ingestion of additional/ different larger prey taxa, as mouth gape increases with growth (pusey & bradshaw 1996; herne 1998). furthermore, the develop- ment of speciﬁc structures such as the ﬁns and individual elements of the feeding apparatus would also permit a broadening or change of diet between successive life history stages. thus, the prey available to ﬁsh at certain stages of development could be a function of both prey abundance constraints imposed on the ﬁsh. developmental and 152 whilst g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides are occasionally found with the other small ﬁshes of the peat ﬂat region, they are most common and abundant in pools where these other species are absent (morgan et al. 1998; morgan & gill 2000). the pools in which these two species are typically found become completely dry by the middle to end of summer (pen et al. 1993; pusey & brad- shaw 1996; morgan et al. 2000). both species survive this predictable annual desiccation by burying in the substrate and ‘aestivating’ until mid-autumn (i.e., april), when they emerge after pools become replenished with prewinter rains (berra & allen 1989; pusey 1989, 1990; pen et al. 1993). the aim of the present study was to combine the approaches undertaken by pusey & bradshaw (1996) and gill & morgan (1998) to test the following hypotheses. firstly, during the mid- wet season when pools are large and food is at its most abundance, and as all life stages of g. nigrostriata are pelagic, whilst those of l. sal- amandroides are benthic, the diets of these species will be distinct at all stages of development. sec- ondly, because the attainment of a well-developed caudal ﬁn by the end of ﬂexion and a full com- plement of ﬁns at the end of larval life would enable ﬁsh to capture a wider range of more agile and/or faster prey, within each species, there will be marked differences in the diets of preﬂexion/ ﬂexion larvae, postﬂexion larvae and juveniles/ adults. finally, by the dry period, when food becomes scarce and the pools in which they live are almost dry, the diets of these two species will be similar. materials and methods collection of galaxiellanigrostriataand lepidogalaxias salamandroides juvenile and adult g. nigrostriata and larval, l. salamandroides were collected from ephemeral pools in the southern peat ﬂats of the d’entre- casteaux national park (for sites see morgan et al. 1998). sampling took place in the mid-wet season (august and september), late-wet season (october and november) and before the pools became completely dry in the dry season (november and december). larvae and juveniles were collected using 340-mm triangular sweep nets (500-mm and 1-mm mesh). additional juve- niles and adults were collected using a 9.5-m seine net consisting of 3-mm mesh. fish were anaesthetised in benzocaine and preserved in 100% ethanol. identification of the larvae and life history stages of galaxiella nigrostriataand lepidogalaxiassalamandroides larvae of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides were identiﬁed with the aid of the descriptions provided by gill & neira (1994) and gill & morgan (1999). furthermore, as larvae of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides are easily distinguished by differences in the pattern of ﬁn development and colouration (gill & neira 1994; gill & morgan 1999), even the earliest larvae of these species could be easily identiﬁed. fish were designated to one of the different developmental stages using snyder’s (1983) variation of the deﬁ- nitions of ahlstrom et al. (1976), i.e., preﬂexion concludes with the appearance of the ﬁrst caudal ray, ﬂexion terminates with the formation of all principal caudal rays and postﬂexion terminates with the formation of all rays in all ﬁns and when the median ﬁnfolds are lost. for the purpose of this study, individuals that had completed the larval stage and were in their ﬁrst year of life (0þ) were considered juveniles (total length (tl), 20–32 mm), whilst adults repre- sented those ﬁsh that were 1 year old (31– 48 mm). in the case of l. salamandroides, an addi- tional category of very large individuals was recognised; this group consisted entirely of female ﬁsh with total lengths >50 mm. n.b. each l. sal- amandroides was designated an age based on the number of annuli present on the sagittal otolith (morgan et al. 2000). the age of individuals of g. nigrostriata was based on length–frequency data (pen et al. 1993). dietary analyses individuals of g. nigrostriata and l. salaman- droides complete the larval stage of life by late spring/early summer (i.e., the late-wet season), and were demonstrated by pusey & bradshaw (1996) to have diets distinct from each other during this period. dry season sampling, when the pools had become greatly reduced in size, failed to yield any l. salamandroides; however, large numbers of g. nigrostriata were captured. for these reasons, and as all of the life stages of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides were only abundant in late winter/early spring (i.e., the mid-wet season), both the intra- and interspeciﬁc differences in diet for all life stages could only be explored during this period. each ﬁsh was identiﬁed and assigned to a developmental stage (see above), measured to the nearest millimetre tl and had its stomach in the case of l. salamandroides, sagittal and, otoliths (see above) removed. the fullness of each diets of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides stomach was then estimated. fullness estimates followed hynes (1950) in which 0–10 points were subjectively assigned to each stomach: 0 signiﬁed empty, 8 signiﬁed ‘full’ and 10 was ‘distended’. only ﬁsh with stomachs that were estimated to be 50% full were used in subsequent analyses. each dietary item within each stomach was identiﬁed to the lowest possible taxon. the percent contribu- tion of each prey type to the total volume was then estimated (hynes 1950). the identiﬁed prey taxa were allocated to one of the ten functional prey categories (seetable 1). each prey category con- tained organisms that utilised the same part of the water column, had similar movement patterns and/or were of a similar size. for example, all cladocera were grouped together as each species found was of a similar size and occupied the same part of the water column. similarly, the largest consumed by l. salamandroides, prey types including amphipoda, trichoptera and odonata, were all grouped together as they were all benthic and of a similar size. the dietary data from individual stomachs were used to construct a similarity matrix, using the bray–curtis similarity coefﬁcient, which was then classiﬁed using hier- archical agglomerative cluster analysis, with group average linking in the primer v5.0 pack- age (clarke & gorley 2001). in order to test the hypotheses that the diets of the different developmental stages differ both within and between species, i.e., preﬂexion/ﬂexion larvae, postﬂexion larvae, juveniles and adults, the similarity matrix for the dietary data of both species was subjected to one-way analysis of simi- larity (anosim) (clarke & gorley 2001). this nonparametric test utilises a permutation proce- dure that is applied to a ranked similarity matrix, based on the original similarity matrix. in this procedure, the test statistic r, a measure of the average rank similarities within a priori desig- nated groups compared with the average rank similarity of all replicates between these groups, is calculated. thus, r is a measure of the discri- mination between groups, where an r value of 0 indicates that similarities between and within groups are the same on average, i.e, there are no differences between groups, and an r value of 1 indicates that all replicates within groups are more similar to each other than to any other replicate from a different group. to test the sig- niﬁcance of the r value, the group labels in the ranked matrix were arbitrarily reassigned for a maximum of 5000 possible permutations. the r statistic is recalculated for each of these permuta- tions and a distribution of these 5000 randomly generated r values is produced. if the original r value is unlikely to have come from this distribu- 153 gill & morgan , i n o x e l f t s o p , i n o x e l f / n o x e l f e r p i , . e . i , e g a t s l a t n e m p o e v e d l d n a e z s i r a l i m s i ) n o i t u b i r t n o c % ( e p y t y e r p f o ) l a m r o n ( s e roid d n a m ala s s xia ala g o pid e l d n a l ) d o b ( a t ria t s ro nig xiella ala g f o s t e d i e h t o t s e p y t y e r p t n e r e f f i d e h t f o ) e m u o v l y b ( n o i t u b i r t n o c e v i t a e r l . t l u d a e h t d n a l 1. e b a t e l i n e v u j d e i f i t n e d n u i l a i r t s e r r e t a n u a f l a o b m e l l o c c i t a u q a r e h t o a n u a f / a r e t p o h c i r t / a d o p h p m a i a t a n o d o a r e t p d i ) e a p u p ( a r e t p d i ) e a v r a l ( a d o c a r t s o a d o p e p o c a r e c o d a c l a r e f i t o r ) r e b m u n ; l t m m e z s i , ; i s e c e p s ( l t n e m p o e v e d f o e g a t s 154 0 1 . 4 . 0 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ . 7 2 . 0 5 2 9 . 4 . 4 7 2 1. 3 . 8 3 . 1 3 . 9 2 1 ^ ^ ^ 2 5 . ^ ^ 4 ^ ^ ^ . 2 ^ ^ 0 . 4 1 4 . 0 2 . 2 . 4 0 6 1. . 1 2 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 7 1. 1 . 7 2 2 . 6 4 4 ^ ^ ^ 5 1 . . 1 1 . 1 2 8 . 0 3 0 . 8 0 . 0 . 6 . 3 9 1 . 8 9 1 . 0 3 2 6 . 5 7 1. 4 6 . 3 9 1. 2 . 1 7 1 0 1 . . 4 6 1 . 7 2 . 3 6 1 3 . 3 . 1 4 ^ . 1 3 . 4 0 5 . 5 . 1 2 2 8 . 5 2 . 7 2 1 6 . 0 1 . 1 2 1 6 . 8 4 1 1. 1 . 5 2 5 7 . . 1 2 4 . 9 1 3 . 3 7 4 8 . 2 . 1 6 . 7 6 2 . 5 3 3 . 6 4 1 0 . 5 6 . 1 4 ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ) 7 ; 1 1 ^ 6 s; e roid d n a m ala s l. i ( n o x e l f / n o x e l f e r p i ) 0 1 ; 1 1 ^ 7 a; t ria t s ro nig g. i ( n o x e l f / n o x e l f e r p i ) 5 1 ; 9 1 ^ 2 1 s; e droid n a m ala s l. i ( n o x e l f t s o p ) 3 1 ; 3 2 ^ 2 1 a; t s tria nigro g. i ( n o x e l f t s o p ) 2 1 ; 4 7 ^ 0 5 s; e droid n a m ala s l. l ( s e a m e f e g r a l ) 2 1 ; 2 3 ^ 0 2 s; e oid dr n a m ala s l. ( e ) 9 ; 8 2 ^ 0 2 a; t s tria nigro g. ( e ) 3 1 ; 8 4 ^ 5 3 s; e roid d n a m ala s l. ( ) 8 1 ; 2 4 ^ 1 3 a; t tria s ro nig g. ( l i l i n e v u j n e v u j t l u d a t l u d a e g n a r e z s i l . ) e a n o i t a r r o f t x e t e e s ( þ 3  l l a e r e w s e roid d n a m ala s l. l e a m e f e g r a l y e v i t c e p s e r . l s, e roid d n a m ala s l. d n a a t s o tria nigr g. r o f d e d r o c e r e r e w e a v r a l i i n o x e l f e r p g n d e e f e n o d n a e e r h t y n o s a l , i d e n b m o c e r e w e a v r a l i n o x e l f d n a n o x e l f e r p i . ) l t ( h t g n e l l a t o t r o f s i tion by chance, the null hypothesis, i.e., there are no differences between groups, can be rejected. to provide a description of the overall diet for each of the a priori designated life-stage groups (i.e., preﬂexion/ﬂexion larvae, postﬂexion larvae, juveniles and either adults of g. nigrostriata or small and large adults of l. salamandroides), the dietary data for individual ﬁsh in each of these groups were pooled. results diets of galaxiellanigrostriataand lepidogalaxias salamandroides the pooled dietary data for each of the predesig- nated developmental stages of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides (table 1) shows that while pre- ﬂexion/ﬂexion larvae of both species (7–11 and 6– 11 mm, respectively) ingested cladocera (7.5 and 42.1%), copepoda (5.5 and 22.1%), ostracoda (1.0 and 16.4%) and diptera larvae (6.0 and 19.3%), only the former species ingested rotifera (65%). compared to their preﬂexion/ﬂexion lar- vae, postﬂexion g. nigrostriata consumed fewer rotifera (4.1%) but more cladocera (31.9%), copepoda (25.8%) and diptera larvae (19.8%), and also collembola (4.2%) and terrestrial fauna (9.2%) from the water surface for the ﬁrst time. postﬂexion l. salamandroides (12–19 mm), how- ever, consumed the same prey items, and in essen- tially the same proportions, as they did at the preﬂexion/ﬂexion stage of their development. terrestrial fauna from the water in contrast to juvenile l. salamandroides and also their own earlier stages, juveniles of g. nigros- triata (20–28 mm) consumed a greater proportion of surface (74.4%) that was mirrored with a concomitant decrease in the proportion of prey taken from the benthos and water column. juvenile l. salaman- droides (20–32 mm), while continuing to ingest a high proportion of cladocera (26.7%), copepoda (12.1%) and diptera larvae (41.7%), consumed far fewer ostracoda (4.1%) than in the earlier stages, and also ingested diptera pupae (2.1%), amphipoda/trichoptera/odonata (11.7%) and some terrestrial fauna (1.2%). adult g. nigrostriata (31–42 mm) ingested less terrestrial fauna (38.3%) and more copepoda (48.6%) than did the juveniles of this species. adult and large female l. salamandroides (35– 48 and 50–74 mm, respectively) consumed a simi- lar range of prey types as their earlier stages, but exhibited an increase in the proportion of larger prey taxa, i.e., amphipoda/trichoptera/odo- nata, ingesting 22.7 and 44.6%, respectively (table 1). diets of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides fig. 1. classification of the volumetric dietary data for individual galaxiella nigrostriata and lepidogalaxias salamandroides collected in late winter (i.e., mid-wet season), n¼ 50 and 59, respectively, and size range¼ 7–42 and 6–74 mm total length (tl), respectively. dietary samples from preflexion/flexion larva, postflexion larva, juvenile and adult g. nigrostriata are represented by f, p, j and a, and those of the equivalent stages and large females for l. salamandroides by f, p, j, a and a. classification of the dietary data classiﬁcation of the individual dietary samples of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides separated the diets into three main groups (fig. 1). the ﬁrst of these groups (i) included, with the exception of one ﬂexion g. nigrostriata (8 mm), whose diet did not include any rotifera, the diets of all of the preﬂexion/ﬂexion g. nigrostriata and the one postﬂexion larva that had ingested rotifera. the second group (ii) contained 32 of the 40 remaining dietary samples from g. nigrostriata, and also those from two preﬂexion larvae, one postﬂexion larva, one adult and two large female l. salamandroides, while the third group (iii) included the remaining dietary samples from l. salamandroides (53), and those from one pre- ﬂexion larva, six postﬂexion larvae and one adult g. nigrostriata (fig. 1). within group ii, the dietary samples from ﬁsh at the same stage of development tended to be grouped together. for example, the diets of eight of the 18 adult g. nigrostriata formed a distinct group (a), while the remaining dietary samples from the adults and also the juveniles tended to form smaller yet still discrete subgroups within group b. in contrast to the dietary samples from the other stages in its development, the dietary samples of postﬂexion g. nigrostriata showed no such tendency to form discrete groupings and were spread throughout both groups ii and iii. as in group ii, the dietary samples in group iii fell into one of the two major groups (i.e., c and d). group c was formed from the dietary samples taken from eight of the 12 large female and ﬁve of the 15 adult l. salamandroides. unlike the sam- ples from g. nigrostriata in group b, the remain- ing samples from l. salamandroides (group d) showed far less of a tendency to form discrete subgroups of diets from ﬁsh at the same stage of development. rather, the dietary samples from preﬂexion/ﬂexion larvae, postﬂexion larvae, juve- niles and adults tended to be interspersed with one another. differences and similarities in the diets during different stages of development one-way analysis of similarity supported the major differences in diet between the two species for most stages, the major shifts in diet between stages in g. nigrostriata and the gradual change in diet between stages of l. salamandroides described above (table 2). thus, the diets of all stages of g. nigrostriata were different from the diets of all stages of l. salamandroides (p 0.025); the diets of each size group/stage of g. nigrostriata were different from all other size groups/stages of this species (p 0.006), while there was no difference in the diets of preﬂexion/ﬂexion, postﬂexion and juvenile or postﬂexion, juvenile and adult l. sal- amandroides (p 0.055), the diets of preﬂexion/ ﬂexion and adult l. salamandroides and also those of the large females and all other stages were signiﬁcantly different (p 0.046). however, two interconnected points must be recognised when using permutation tests such as those employed here. firstly, the number of possible permutations between two groups, and thus the level of sig- niﬁcance that can be inferred, is dependent on the number of replicates in these groups and, sec- ondly, when many such pairwise tests are per- formed, the risk of accumulating type i errors is high (clarke & warwick 1994). 155 gill & morgan l e a m e f e g r a l s e oid dr n a m ala s l. s e roid d n a m ala s l. t l u d a a t ria t s ro nig g.     8 2 8 0 . 8 3 4 0 .     6 7 4 0 . 2 2 5 0 .     5 8 5 0 . 2 0 3 0 .    8 1 7 0 . 9 4 1 0 .    5 3 7 0 . 3 0 2 0 .  7 0 1 0 . 8 7 0 0 .   8 2 7 0 . 0 6 0 0 .   4 1 7 0 .     2 3 9 0 . 7 2 6 0 .     1 4 4 0 . 3 7 7 0 .     3 5 2 0 . 1 6 7 0 . e l i n e v u j s e roid d n a m ala s l. a t s tria nigro g. i n o x e l f t s o p s e oid dr n a m ala s l. a t s o tria nigr g. i n o x e l f / n o x e l f e r p i s e roid d n a m ala s l. a t tria s ro nig g. s. e roid d n a m ala s s xia ala g o pid e l d n a a t ria t s ro nig xiella ala g f o s e g a t s e f i l t n e r e f f i d e h t n e e w t e b s n o s i r a p m o c m s o n a r o f i s e u a v l l a c i t s i t a t s r . l 2 e b a t 156  5 6 1 0 . 4 8 0 0 .   4 9 7 0 .     0 4 6 0 . 9 2 8 0 .  3 2 1 0 . i . t e d n i s e c n e r e f f i d ) 1 0 0 < p . (   6 6 7 0 . 6 6 1 0 .     4 5 9 0 . 2 8 7 0 .   1 9 7 0 . 9 4 0 0 .    8 5 7 0 . 3 0 2 0 .   7 1 7 0 . i t n a c i f i n g s s e t o n e d   i ; t e d n i s e c n e r e f f i d ) 5 0 0 < p . ( i t n a c i f i n g s s e t o n e d  s e roid d n a m ala s l. i n o x e l f / n o x e l f e r p i a t s o tria nigr g. s e roid d n a m ala s l. a t s o tria nigr g. i n o x e l f t s o p s e roid d n a m ala s l. a t s o tria nigr g. s e roid d n a m ala s l. a t s o tria nigr g. e l i n e v u j t l u d a in the present study, the pairwise comparison with the least number of replicates (i.e., that between l. salamandroides preﬂexion/ﬂexion lar- vae and juvenile g. nigrostriata, with seven and nine replicates, respectively) had 5720 possible permutations (c. 0.02% level). thus, all 36 pair- wise comparisons could be tested at the 1% level. however, as there were 36 possible pairwise com- parisons, acceptance at the usual 5% level of signiﬁcance would be likely to result in the erro- neous rejections of two null hypotheses. there- fore, the six cases that fall between the 5 and 1% levels should be considered with some caution. discussion ontogenetic changes in diet and dietary overlap preﬂexion/ﬂexion g. nigrostriata the pooled dietary data, and classiﬁcation and analysis of similarity of individual dietary samples for each of the developmental stages of g. nigros- triata and l. salamandroides clearly demonstrated the following four points. firstly, throughout their life, both of these species prey on many of the same invertebrate taxa. for example, with the excep- tion of ostracoda in the case of adult g. nigros- triata, cladocera, copepoda, ostracoda and diptera larvae were ingested by each stage of both species. secondly, while all stages in the life cycles of these species preyed on many of the same invertebrate taxa, the differences in the relative contributions of these prey taxa represented sig- niﬁcant differences between the diets of these species at most stages. for example, preﬂexion/ ﬂexion larvae of both species ingested cladocera, copepoda, ostracoda and diptera larvae; how- ever, also ingested a large proportion of rotifera (65%). thirdly, the diets for each of the developmental stages of g. nigrostriata were signiﬁcantly differ- ent from each other, e.g., in comparison to pre- ﬂexion/ﬂexion larvae, postﬂexion g. nigrostriata consumed fewer rotifera, more cladocera, cope- poda and diptera larvae and also ingested col- lembola and terrestrial fauna, whilst juveniles ingested a very high proportion of terrestrial fauna. and ﬁnally in contrast to the situation in g. nigrostriata, changes in diets of l. salaman- droides were more gradual. thus, postﬂexion l. salamandroides ingested approximately the same proportions of the same prey items as at the preﬂexion/ﬂexion stage of their develop- ment; juveniles continued to ingest cladocera, copepoda, diptera larvae, ostracoda, but also diptera pupae, amphipoda/trichoptera/odo- nata and some terrestrial fauna for the ﬁrst time. adults and large females consumed a far greater proportion of larger prey taxa, i.e., amphipoda/ trichoptera/odonata. ecological considerations and resource partitioning galaxiella nigrostriata and l. salamandroides breed from late may to late august (i.e., winter or early-wet season sensu pusey & bradshaw 1996), approximately 6–8 weeks after the pools in which they aestivate become reinundated (see pen et al. 1993; morgan et al. 2000). this reinun- dation stimulates hatching in many of the drought-resistant eggs of the invertebrate fauna of these pools, and by the time that ﬁsh larvae begin to appear, the zoobenthos and zooplankton in these pools have peaked in densities (up to c. 5000 individuals m 2 and 10,000 individuals m 3, respectively) and provide an abundant food source for these ﬁsh (pusey & edward 1990; pusey & bradshaw 1996). as only preﬂexion/ﬂexion larvae and adults were present during the early- wet season and the diets of these stages both within and between species were distinct from each other, the combination of high densities of a diverse range of prey and relatively low densities of ﬁsh will minimise the possibility that food becomes limiting during the early-wet season. by the mid-wet season, all developmental stages of both species were present, the pools had contracted in size and prey densities had fallen (pusey & edward 1990; pusey & bradshaw 1996). the fact that the diets of each stage of g. nigrostriata were different from those of all stages of l. salamandroides would reduce the potential for any interspeciﬁc competition at a time when food resources were in decline. furthermore, during the dry season, l. salaman- droides buried themselves and began their aesti- vation several weeks before the pools became dry, whereas g. nigrostriata were still present in large numbers when the pools were only a metre or so across and several centimetres deep. this differ- ence in the timing of the beginning of aestivation for these two species would have negated the likelihood of interspeciﬁc competition for a very limited food resource. regarding our hypothesis that there would be marked differences in the diets of different stages within a species, the data for the different stages of g. nigrostriata clearly supported such a conten- tion. however, whilst the data for l. salaman- droides were not so unambiguous, they showed that the proportion of small prey, i.e., cladocera, copepoda and ostracoda, was greatest in larvae, that of medium-sized prey, i.e., diptera larvae, was greatest in juveniles and that the proportion of large prey, i.e., amphipoda, trichoptera and diets of g. nigrostriata and l. salamandroides odonata, was greatest in adults. thus, whilst the ossiﬁcation of feeding structures and the devel- opment of ﬁns, in conjunction with an increase in size, has apparently resulted in marked shifts in the diets of the different stages of g. nigrostriata, the gradual change in diet exhibited by l. sala- mandroides may reﬂect an increase in size alone. resumen 1. hacia la mitad y al ﬁnal de la estacio´ n hu´ meda y durante la estacio´ n seca, evaluamos niveles de similaridad entre las dietas de larvas, juveniles y adultos de galaxiella nigrostriata y lepidogalaxias salamandroides colectados en pozos efı´ - meros del sur-oeste de australia. 2. hacia la mitad de la estacio´ n seca, la competicio´ n intra- e inter-especiﬁca por el alimento en declive parecio´ minimi- zarse a traves de diferencias en la utilizacio´ n de presas por diferentes estadios de desarrollo de ambas especies. al ﬁna- lizar la estacio´ n hu´ meda, los pozos contenian solamente juveniles de g. nigrostriata y juveniles y adultos de l. sala- mandroides cuyas dietas aparecieron enormemente dife- rentes. 3. un cambio hacia fauna de origen terrestre por parte de g. nigrostriata y la ingestio´ n de mayores proporciones de taxones bento´ nicos de mayor taman˜ o por l. salamandroides minimizo´ la competicio´ n inter-especiﬁca por el alimento cuando decayeron las densidades de zooplancton. diferen- cias temporales al inicio del estı´ o previenen competencia inter-especı´ ﬁca por el alimento durante la estacio´ n seca. acknowledgments we are deeply indebted to the many people who spent many weekends helping in the ﬁeld. this work was supported by a murdoch university small research grant and grants from the natural heritage trust, fisheries wa and water and rivers commission. thanks are extended to g. young and f. valesini for their comments on the manuscript. references ahlstrom, e.h., butler, j.l. & sumida, b.y. 1976. pelagic stromateoid fishes (pisces, perciformes) of the eastern pacific: kinds, distributions, and early life histories and observations on five of these from the northwest atlantic. bulletin of marine science 26: 285–402. allen, g.r. 1989. freshwater fishes of australia. neptune city: t.f.h. publications, 240 pp. berra, t.m. & allen, g.r. 1989. burrowing, emergence, behaviour, and functional morphology of the australian salamanderfish, lepidogalaxias salamandroides. fisheries 14: 2–10. christensen p. 1982. the distribution of lepidogalaxias salamandroides and other small freshwater fishes in the lower south-west of western australia. journal of the royal society of western australia 65: 131–141. clarke, k.r. & gorley, r.n. 2001. primer v5: user manual/tutorial. plymouth: primer-e. clarke, k.r. & warwick, r.m. 1994. change in marine communities: an approach to statistical analysis and interpretation. plymouth: natural environment research council, uk, 144 pp. gill, h.s. & morgan d.l. 1998. larval development of nannatherina balstoni regan (nannopercidae), with a 157 gill & morgan description of ontogenetic changes in diet. ecology of freshwater fish 7: 132–139. gill, h.s. & morgan d.l. 1999. larval development of the salamanderfish, lepidogalaxias salamandroides. copeia 1999: 219–224. gill, h.s. & neira, f.j. 1994. larval descriptions of three galaxiid fishes endemic to south-western australia: galaxias occidentalis, galaxiella munda and galaxiella nigrostriata (salmoniformes: galaxiidae). australian journal of marine and freshwater research 45: 1307– 1317. herne, m. 1998. the development and comparative morphology of the feeding apparatus in the co-occurring nannopercids, nannatherina balstoni and edelia vittata. honours thesis. perth, western australia: murdoch university. hynes, h.b.n. 1950. the food of sticklebacks with a review of the methods used in studies of the food of fishes. journal of animal ecology 19: 36–58. morgan, d.l. & gill, h.s. 2000. fish associations within the different inland habitats of lower south-western australia. records of the western australian museum 20: 31–37. morgan, d.l., gill, h.s. & potter, i.c. 1995. life cycle, growth and diet of balston’s pygmy perch in its natural habitat of acidic pools in south-western australia. journal of fish biology 47: 808–825. morgan, d.l., gill, h.s. & potter, i.c. 1998. distribution, identification and biology of freshwater fish in south- western australia. records of the western australian museum supplement no. 56: 97 pp. morgan, d.l., gill, h.s. & potter, i.c. 2000. age composition, growth and reproductive biology of the salamanderfish lepidogalaxias salamandroides: a re- examination. environmental biology of fishes 57: 191–204. pen, l.j., gill, h.s., potter, i.c. & humphries, p. 1993. growth, age composition, reproductive biology and diet of the black-stripe minnow galaxiella nigrostriata (ship- way), including comparisons with the other two galax- iella species. journal of fish biology 43: 847–863. pusey, b.j. 1989. aestivation in the teleost fish lepidoga- laxias salamandroides mees. journal of comparative biochemistry and physiology 92a: 137–138. the salamanderfish lepidogalaxias pusey, b.j. 1990. seasonality, aestivation and the life history salamandroides of (pisces: lepidogalaxiidae). environmental biology of fishes 29: 15–26. pusey, b.j. & bradshaw, s.d. 1996. diet and dietary overlap in fishes of temporary waters of southwestern australia. ecology of freshwater fish 5: 183–194. pusey, b.j. & edward, d.h. 1990. limnology of the southern acid peat flats, south-western australia. journal of the royal society of western australia 73: 29–46. snyder, d.e. 1983. fish eggs and larvae. in: nielsen, l.a. & techniques. bethesda: johnson, d.l., eds. fisheries american fisheries society, pp.165–197. 158  