ecology of freshwater fish 2003: 12: 159 printed in denmark  all rights reserved copyright # blackwell munksgaard 2003 editorial the second nordic international symposium on freshwater fish migration and fish passage was held in reykjavik, iceland in september 2001. the aim was to present and discuss problems, research and solutions to ®sh passages. more than 100 participants attended the conference. fish passages are a very important issue in almost all european and north american rivers. furthermore, the economic development in asia, africa and south america put pressure on demands for energy of which a substantial part is expected to come from hydropower develop- ment. all the more reason to try and synthesise the knowledge. undoubtedly, a large amount of knowledge exists on local basis but a search for peer-reviewed literature shows only a rather limited number of papers. this does not relate to the number of studies undertaken, but probably has more to do with the fact that most research on ®sh passages are sponsored by corporations, which do not demand it to be published in scienti®c journals. furthermore, a large number of the studies are performed in north america and canada. another aspect evident from the literature is that many ®sh passage designs have been tested with good success in laboratory settings, whereas ®eld studies of the same designs seem to be lack- ing, or at best demonstrate a poorer success. this can of course be attributed to the more uncon- trolled conditions in the ®eld. however, it is in the ®eld where the designs must pass their real test and so laboratory research on ®sh passages is important but can never replace practical studies in the ®eld. we hope that this conference and the following ®ve papers will help focus on scienti®c evaluation of ®sh passages. acknowledgements the editors of ecology of freshwater fish (eff) grate- fully acknowledge the great contribution of the reviewers of the manuscripts considered for the second nordic inter- national symposium on freshwater fish migration and fish passage. javier loboâ n-cerviaâ , erik mortensen & kim aarestrup (guest editor) 159  