accepted: 19 january 2017 doi: 10.1111/eff.12344 o r i g i n a l a r t i c l e summer habitat and movements of juvenile salmonids in a coastal river of washington state john j. winkowski  | mara s. zimmerman washington department of fish and wildlife, olympia, wa, usa correspondence john j. winkowski, washington department of fish and wildlife, olympia, wa, usa. email: john.winkowski@dfw.wa.gov funding information washington state legislature. abstract we investigated the summer ecology of juvenile steelhead trout onchorhynchus mykiss and chinook salmon o. tshawytscha in the context of habitat use and movement be- haviour. the study area was a 14.8 km section of the chehalis river, washington, and is of particular interest due to recent proposals for both a flood retention dam and restoration actions in this watershed. ten study reaches were paired in distance up- stream and downstream from a central point where a passive integrated transponder antenna array was operated between late june and september 2014. juvenile densi- ties for each species were associated with reach- scale habitat and temperature char- acteristics. juvenile steelhead underwent upstream and downstream movements up to 7 km, although more fish from further away moved downstream than upstream. juvenile steelhead repeated horizontal movements throughout the study period, but daily detections were not associated with temperature or flow. the majority (81%) of steelhead movements occurred between the hours of 04:00–07:00 and 18:00–21:00. juvenile chinook underwent a downstream migration that was nearly complete by the end of august. most juvenile chinook were detected just once and movements oc- curred on days with warmer stream temperature and higher flows. the majority of chinook movements occurred at night. although juvenile salmonids are often thought to have small home ranges during summer months, our results suggest that horizontal movements may be more prevalent than previously thought. summer habitat should be defined by a network of suitable rearing reaches with connectivity available in both upstream and downstream directions. k e y w o r d s chinook, connectivity, horizontal migration, steelhead, summer rearing 1 |  introduction in river basins with rain- dominant hydrology, summer low flows restrict suitable rearing habitat for juvenile salmonids (bjornn & reiser, 1991; reeves, everest, & nickelson, 1989). limited habitat can be attributed to abiotic factors such as reductions in water volume and increases in water temperature, and resulting biotic factors such as increases in a[correction added on 13 april 2017 after first online publication: the sentence was updated for clarity] densities and biological interactions (e.g., competition and predation) (bradford & heinonen, 2008; magoulick & kobza, 2003; stradmeyer, höjesjö, griffiths, gilvear, & armstrong, 2008)a. within limited suit- able rearing areas, specific habitat features have been identified as important for juvenile salmonids in terms of food, energetics, and shelter (bjornn & reiser, 1991). for example, pools provide import- ant rearing areas for juvenile coho (oncorhynchus_kisutch) and chinook salmon (o. tshawytscha) (mossop & bradford, 2006; rosenfeld, porter, & parkinson, 2000), swifter flowing riffles with large substrate tend to be preferred by juvenile steelhead trout (o. mykiss) (bisson, sullivan, ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:255–269. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff   |  255 © 2017 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd256  |     & nielsen, 1988; everest & chapman, 1972), and large woody debris within pools provides cover from predators (fausch & northcote, 1992; mossop & bradford, 2004). tributary junctions and other thermal re- fugia are important locations for juvenile salmon during low flows, es- pecially in rivers with temperatures close to the upper threshold of thermal tolerances, and fish have been documented to seek thermal refugia through reach- scale movements (dugdale et al., 2015). seasonal movements and habitat use have been identified at large spatial scales, e.g., at a watershed scale (dobos, corsi, schill, dupont, & quist, 2016; nickelson, rodgers, johnson, & solazzi, 1992; peterson, 1982; reeves, sleeper, & lang, 2011) and also within season at smaller spatial scales, e.g., <1 km (armstrong et al., 2013; lonzarich, franckowiak, & allen, 2009; ruff et al., 2011; schmetterling & adams, 2004). while early studies on summer movements indicated little movement and rela- tively small home ranges for juvenile salmonids (edmundson, everest, & chapman, 1968), more recent studies suggest summer movements may be more prevalent than previously thought (kahler, roni, & quinn, 2001) and movements have been linked to fish seeking optimal foraging loca- tions (gowan & fausch, 2002). for example, optimal foraging was used to explain the diel horizontal migrations of juvenile coho salmon that trav- elled up to 1 km to exploit rich feeding grounds and thermal patches favourable for metabolism and assimilative capacity (armstrong et al., 2013).b these findings highlight an idea that movements on multiple scales are important components of the ecology of juvenile salmonids during summer flow conditions and fish may not only rely on individual habitat units, e.g., pools or riffles, but also a spatially heterogeneous stream environment. from an ecological perspective, investigating the ex- tent of horizontal movements of juvenile salmonids will increase our un- derstanding of the freshwater rearing period and the spatial scale at which juvenile salmonids interact in the stream community. from an applied standpoint, enhancing our understanding of movements will better inform the scale at which habitat alterations may affect fish populations and the scale at which restoration or conservation actions should be considered. two types of habitat “actions” are currently being considered in the chehalis river in washington state. the first action is the proposed installation of a dam in the upper main stem river as a flood reduction strategy. the dam location represents a geomorphic transition zone between a confined (upstream) and unconfined (downstream) river val- ley. the second action includes habitat enhancements throughout the major sub- basins that are proposed to remedy over a century of habitat degradation (aquatic species enhancement plan technical committee, 2014). among the current management concerns is the need to iden- tify the scale at which these alterations are expected to impact steel- head and salmon, including the fish movements that may occur through the affected areas. in particular, upstream and downstream movements during the freshwater residency of juvenile salmonids are less well un- derstood than the directional migrations of spawners and smolts. the goal of this study was to improve understanding of summer ecology of juvenile steelhead trout and chinook salmon in the context of both habitat use and movement behaviour. the study area included a stretch of the main stem chehalis river that straddled the location winkowski and zimmerman of the proposed dam; however, we anticipate that the results should be more broadly applicable to understanding juvenile salmonid move- ments in coastal watersheds with rain- dominant hydrology. our objec- tives were to (i) identify reach- scale environmental variables associated with juvenile steelhead and chinook densities and (ii) identify juvenile steelhead and chinook movements among habitat reaches and envi- ronmental variables associated with these movements. environmental variables were investigated at seasonal, daily, and diel time scales. 2 |  materials and methods 2.1 | study area the chehalis river is a 6,889 km2 coastal watershed in washington state (figure 1). the river flows north from its headwaters in the willapa hills and is fed by multiple large tributaries draining from the cascade and olympic mountain ranges before flowing west into grays harbor and the pacific ocean. relatively confined headwater tributaries merge into an unconfined meandering main stem river with an extensive network of off- channel habitats. the focal area of this study, the upper chehalis river sub- basin, is characterised by a confined channel, moderate to low- gradient, pool- riffle channel type (montgomery, beamer, pess, & quinn, 1999) with exposed bedrock interspersed (m.s. zimmerman and j.j. winkowski, unpublished data). the hydrology of the basin is rain dominated, which results in an ex- tended summer low flow period each year. within the study area, summer low flows ranging between 0.6 and 1.7 m/s3 (20–60 f/s3) are established between the months of june and september. the chehalis river basin supports a diverse assemblage of native species that includes wild populations of coho salmon, chinook salmon, chum salmon o. keta, steelhead, and sea run cutthroat trout o. clarkii (mcphail & lindsey, 1986; wydoski & whitney, 2003). this study fo- cuses on two species which rear in the selected study area—steelhead trout and chinook salmon. although coho salmon are typically abun- dant in this area of the river, observations in the study year were too few (due to low spawner numbers the previous fall) to warrant analysis of the tagging and snorkel data collected for this species. our study was conducted over 14.8 km of the chehalis river main stem. across this area, we selected 10 reaches that were paired in dis- tance upstream and downstream from a central point; each reach had a paired reach that was on the opposite side (upstream and downstream) and approximately equidistant from the central point (figure 1). the length of each reach was selected to include two pool- riffle habitat units or a total maximum length of 250 m (range = 127–243 m). the distances from the central point of the study area to the centre points of the most upstream and downstream reaches were 7.5 and 7.3 km, respectively. 2.2 | data collection 2.2.1 | habitat metrics b[correction added on 20 june 2017 after first online publication: species name for coho salmon was incorrectly mentioned and has been removed in this version] we obtained measures of channel topography (length, wetted width, and depth) using a thalweg profile method developed by east et al. winkowski and zimmerman     |  257 figure 1 study area in the chehalis river, washington state showing location of study (tagging and snorkelling) reaches, temperature loggers, and the passive integrated transponder (pit) antenna array. study area is shown from an aerial and longitudinal perspective (study design schematic insert) (2014). we measured wetted width with a laser range finder and thalweg depth along the longitudinal transect of the channel with the combination of a stadia rod and laser range finder. for each reach, 13–20 longitudinal measures were obtained. thalweg profiles such as these provide accurate and precise channel and pool measurements, are easily repeatable, and produce metrics that are relevant to fish (lisle, 1987; madej, 1999; mossop & bradford, 2006). from the lon- gitudinal transect data, we used three metrics for further analysis— mean wetted width, maximum residual pool depth, and proportion residual pool length (proportion of pool habitat). mean wetted width was the average of all wetted width measures from a given reach. in addition, surface area (mean wetted width multiplied by reach length) was estimated for the purpose of calculating fish densities. residual pools were identified from the thalweg profile as depressions at least 0.5 m depth at the deepest point that would retain water if there were no flow in the stream (lisle, 1987; mossop & bradford, 2006). maximum residual pool depth was the maximum depth of all residual pools in the reach. proportion pool length was the summed length of all residual pools in the reach divided by the reach length. habitat characteristics of each reach were measured between september 8 and september 11, 2014. we obtained measures of substrate composition (substrate size, proportion bedrock) in each reach using a pebble count method (wolman, 1954). we conducted a minimum of four cross- channel transects at equal longitudinal intervals throughout each reach with 100 pieces of substrate measured in each transect. an additional one or two cross- channel transects were conducted if a split channel was present. if the substrate was determined to be bedrock, the surveyor recorded this as a data point and moved on to collect the next piece of substrate. from the pebble count data, we used two metrics—pro- portion bedrock and substrate size—for further analyses. proportion bedrock was the proportion of bedrock substrate to the total sample of substrate across all cross- channel transects in a reach. substrate size was the 80th quantile of substrate size for all nonbedrock data points collected in each reach (hereafter d80). 2.2.2 | temperature metrics we obtained stream temperatures of the study reaches using tem- perature loggers (onset hobo pendant logger 64k ua- 001- 64) deployed at six fixed locations spanning the 14.8 km study area (figure 1). stream temperatures were recorded at 30 min intervals. at each of the six locations, logger positioning was based on three crite- ria: well- mixed water, shade, and enough depth for loggers to remain submerged for the summer low flow period. loggers were secured in perforated plastic vinyl chloride housing which allowed flowing water to contact the logger but shielded the logger from sunlight. prior to deployment, loggers were compared to a “reference” logger to en- sure measurement deviations did not exceed 0.5°c. upon retrieval, loggers were compared to an nist reference thermometer to ensure measurement deviations did not exceed 0.5°c. we used three lev- els of screening to remove erroneous temperature data from analy- sis. loggers were routinely inspected in the field to ensure they were well positioned in the thalweg and submerged. data were plotted by time and visually inspected for outliers or abnormalities compared to neighbouring loggers. data were erroneous if the rate of hourly change exceeded 2.5°c, which likely indicated that the logger was de- watered during that time (rieman & chandler, 1999). we used two metrics of stream temperature for analysis—mean of daily maximum temperatures and the proportion of time that tempera- tures exceeded 18°c. temperature metrics were calculated separately for each of the three survey periods when fish counts were obtained 258  |     by snorkelling (june 24 to july 7, august 4–12, and september 11–17). we selected the 18°c threshold to represent unfavourable rearing conditions in the study area based on previous work with juvenile rainbow trout and coho salmon (hokanson, kleiner, & thorslund, 1977; madej, currens, ozaki, yee, & anderson, 2006). the location of each logger was adjacent to but not directly located within each of the study reaches (figure 1). therefore, we used a linear interpolation between the closest upstream and downstream temperature logger relative to each study reach to predict temperature metrics. to vali- date this approach, we interpolated the maximum daily temperature for three logger locations within our study footprint (most upstream, most downstream, and most central) and calculated the difference be- tween actual and interpolated maximum temperatures for each day of each sample period. we observed a mean difference of 0.05°c (±0.9°c standard deviation) between actual and interpolated values. the mean difference indicated that our interpolated temperature had minimal bias. 2.2.3 | fish densities we obtained counts of fish in each study reach over three time peri- ods. snorkel surveys were conducted early (june 24 to july 7), mid- dle (august 4–12), and late (september 11–16) in the summer rearing period. for each snorkel survey, two divers worked from downstream to upstream on each side of the river and counted juvenile salmo- nids from the mid- point of the river to each diver’s respective side of the channel. juvenile salmonids were classified based on species and size category as age- 0 trout (<90 mm fork length, fl), age- 1+ trout (90–200 mm fl), and chinook salmon. supplemental seine- netting determined that trout were primarily steelhead, but species could not be definitively determined when snorkelling. hereafter age- 0 and 1+ trout will be referred to as steelhead 0+ and 1+. based on observed size distributions of chinook salmon (<90 mm fl) in this area of the chehalis river, counts were categorised as subyearlings. divers made data recording stops when fish were observed in large aggregations in an attempt to avoid duplicate counts. the same two divers com- pleted all passes to minimise variation in the snorkel counts. divers conducted two repeat passes with the same bank orientation during the early and late snorkel surveys to measure repeatability of the diver counts. during the two- pass snorkel surveys, divers waited a mini- mum of 10 min between passes. we estimated fish densities in terms of species and age class per 100 m2. to quantify precision of the snorkel counts, we conducted two consecutive passes and calculated the coefficient of variation (cv) be- tween passes. we did this for two snorkel events, early and late. for these snorkel events, we averaged counts from both passes for density analysis. for the middle snorkel event, we conducted one pass only. subsequently, we used the single count (sum of the two divers) for analysis. 2.2.4 | fish movements winkowski and zimmerman each of the 10 study reaches and a detection array was operated at the mid- point of the study area (figure 1). the pairing of study reaches by distance to this central array allowed us to understand how both distance and direction influenced the probability of fish movements. juvenile salmonids were collected from each reach by seine-net- ting between june 24 and july 10, 2014. all juveniles longer than 65- mm fl that were in good condition were anesthetised (tricaine methanesulfonate), measured for fork length (mm) and weight (g), and implanted with a pit tag (12.5 mm, 134.2 khz; biomark inc.) in the peritoneal cavity. fulton’s condition factor (k = 100 × w/l3) was calculated to represent body condition (murphy & willis, 1996). following the tagging event, fish were held in live wells until fully re- covered and released into the habitat unit where they were captured. upon subsequent detection, pit tags served as unique identifiers that allowed us to identify the species, direction and distance of travel, and body size and condition at release. a pit antenna array was operated at the mid- point of the study area (rkm 175) between june 20 and september 29, 2014. six sta- tionary antennas (6 × 1.2 m) were configured in two rows of three (rows separated by 4 m) and spanned the entirety of the wetted channel at the mid- point of the study area (rkm 175). each antenna was connected to an is1001- 24v antenna control node, and all an- tennas were controlled by an is1001 master controller (biomark inc.). the detection range of each antenna was approximately 0.5 m as assessed at the beginning and intermittently throughout the study. at flow levels recorded during the study period, detec- tion range exceeded the water depth at each antenna. we used two methods of ensuring our antennas were functioning properly throughout the season. a “virtual test tag” (vtt) is an electronic signal sent to each antenna at specified time intervals from the master controller; a passed vtt test indicates that antennas are functioning properly to read tags. we set our vtt interval to 1 hr throughout the season. in addition, we manually ran pit tags over each antenna throughout the study period at roughly 1 week intervals. 2.3 | analysis of habitat use and fish movements 2.3.1 | habitat associations we used generalised linear mixed effects models to determine how fish densities were associated with survey period and with habitat characteristics (zuur, ieno, & saveliev, 2009). habitat characteristics included five habitat (wetted width, maximum residual pool depth, proportion pool length, substrate d80, proportion bedrock) and two temperature (mean daily maximum temperature, duration > 18°c) variables. prior to analysis, each of the habitat and temperature metrics was scaled to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. correlations among predictive variables were examined visually and with a spearman’s rank correlation. to document fish movement in our study area, juvenile salmo- nids were tagged with passive integrated transponder (pit) tags at we evaluated the mixed effects model with a poisson and neg- ative binomial distribution and selected the negative binomial if winkowski and zimmerman the model fit was overdispersed with the poisson error structure (korner- nievergelt et al., 2015). three potential model structures were explored—fixed effect, random intercept only, or random in- tercept and slope. the fixed effect model was selected for analy- sis if the standard deviation of the random effect was negligible in value compared to the parameter coefficients. the random intercept model was selected for analysis if the random intercept with slope did not improve fit over the random intercept model (chi- square sta- tistic, α = .05). the first analysis tested whether fish densities differed among survey periods. because the model would not converge with either a poisson or negative binomial error structure, log- transformed fish density (count divided by surface area) was used as the response vari- able and the analysis was conducted with a gaussian error structure. survey period was the fixed effect and site was the random effect. the data were analysed with random intercept and slope models for both species. difference among survey periods (α = .05) were further evaluated with a tukey post hoc test. the second analysis tested whether fish densities could be pre- dicted from reach- scale environmental characteristics. habitat and temperature metrics were the fixed effects, and survey period was the random effect. fish count was the response variable, and area (log transformed) was included as an offset predictor variable. data were analysed with a negative binomial variance structure and a ran- dom intercept model. coefficients for each predictor variable were estimated from the likelihood function and coefficient values with 95% confidence intervals that did not overlap zero were considered to significantly contribute to variation in fish density. larger values were considered to have a larger influence than smaller values be- cause predictor variables had been scaled prior to analysis (tucker et al., 2015). mixed effects model analyses were conducted using the lme4 package (bates, mächler, bolker, & walker, 2014), pairwise compari- sons were conducted using the multcomp package (hothorn, bretz, & westfall, 2008), and the dispersion metric was calculated the blmeco package (korner- nievergelt et al., 2015) in r v. 3.3.1 (r core team, 2016). 2.3.2 | seasonal movements we used a generalised linear model (stroup, 2012) with a binomial error structure to test whether fish arrival at the detection array was associated with tagging location and fish biological charac- teristics. the response variable was the maiden detection (yes, no) of each fish at the array. predictor variables included general tagging location (upstream or downstream, hereafter direction), distance between tagging location and detection array (hereaf- ter distance), fork length at tagging, fish condition (fulton’s k, weight divided by length cubed) at tagging, and the interactions between direction and distance, direction and fork length, and direction and fish condition. interaction terms allowed us to bet- ter understand if fish from upstream and downstream expressed differences in behaviour relative to arrival to the detection array.     |  259 these differences might be expected given the changes in river habitat broadly observed in an upstream and downstream direc- tion (m.s. zimmerman and j.j. winkowski, unpublished data) and the steep cascade locally observed just downstream (300 m) of the array. we used a model selection approach to determine which com- bination of variables best explained the arrival of fish. overall model fit was evaluated by comparing the saturated model (all variables in- cluded) to the null model (intercept only). if the saturated model was a better overall fit than the null model (asymptotic chi- square test; p < .05), the best fitting combination of predictor variables was se- lected based on akaike information criterion (aic) values corrected for small sample sizes (burnham & anderson, 2002). the difference in aicc values between the model with the lowest aicc score and other candidate models (∆aicc) was used as the ranking criterion. a ∆aicc score less than three suggested support for the model, whereas ∆aicc scores greater than three indicated weaker support (burnham & anderson, 2002). the strength of support for each model was based on akaike weights which are the probability that a given model was the best among the set of models examined. of the top models with equivalent support, we used the principle of parsimony and selected the candidate model with the fewest parameters as the best model to explain the data. analyses of fish movement data were completed using the aiccmodavg package (mazerolle, 2011) in r v. 3.3.1 (r core team, 2016). 2.3.3 | daily movements we used a generalised additive model (gam) (wood, 2006) to exam- ine the relationship of daily movements with daily steam tempera- tures and flows. daily movements were the unique daily individual fish detections. temperature data were from a temperature log- ger located 700 m downstream of the antenna site because the temperature logger placed at the antenna site was inadvertently removed before the end of the study (figure 1). five measures of daily temperature (mean, maximum, minimum, range, and duration of time >18°c) were highly correlated with each other (pearson’s r = 0.7–0.9) and were combined into one principal component that explained 81% of the variation in the daily values (loadings of indi- vidual measures ranged between 0.35 and 0.49). stream flow was the log- transformed value of daily mean flow (usgs 12019310, 1 km downstream of the antenna). data were removed from a 5 day period in mid- september when the antenna array did not func- tion properly and no detections were recorded. the gam analy- sis included a default smoothing function, cubic regression spline, and smoothing parameter estimation method (generalised cross- validation criterion). the model was fit to the data with a poisson distribution and an autoregressive moving average (p = 1, q = 0) error structure. autocorrelation parameters were selected by fitting the full model with autoregressive moving average error term and choosing the parameterisation (p, q parameters were examined for values 0–3) with the lowest aic value. models were compared with 260  |     each environmental variable (temperature, flow) independently and combined using the same criteria for model selection as the seasonal movement analysis. the principal components analysis was conducted using the “stats” package, and the gam analysis was conducted using the mcgv pack- age (wood, 2011) in r (r core team, 2016). 2.3.4 | diel movements a directional movement (upstream or downstream) was assigned on two criteria. first, a fish needed to be detected at both antenna rows within 60 min, and second, after a fish completed a directional move- ment that fish needed to remain undetected (i.e., did not return to the array location) for a minimum of 60 min. approximately 95% and 97% of downstream and upstream assigned movements, respectively, were comprised of detections at antenna rows within 10 min suggest- ing that fish rarely “milled” between antenna rows. after assigning directionality to individual movements, we calculated the number of winkowski and zimmerman upstream and downstream movements by hour throughout the study period. 3 |  results 3.1 | physical habitat characteristics and temperature measures of stream thalweg profiles, pebble counts, and temperature varied among the 10 reaches. the proportion of pool habitat ranged from 30% to 99% of each reach (figure 2g). maximum residual pool depths ranged from 0.53 to 1.70 m (figure 2h). the two reaches char- acterised by the largest substrate (d80 values of 17.3 and 32.8 cm) were just downstream from the centre of the study area, whereas the remain- ing eight reaches had smaller substrate with d80 values ranging from 3.6 to 9.0 cm (figure 2i). the proportion of bedrock ranged from 0% to 31% among study reaches (figure 2j). correlations among habitat and tem- perature metrics across study reaches ranged between a spearman’s ρ figure 2 juvenile salmonid densities (fish per 100 m2) with sample period (a–c), temperature metrics (d, e), and habitat metrics (f–j) in 10 study reaches located between rkm 167.7 and 182.5 of the chehalis river winkowski and zimmerman of −0.68 to 0.56. over the three survey periods, mean daily maximum temperatures in the study reaches ranged between 15.8 and 24.5°c and temperatures exceeded 18°c between 0% and 89% of the time (figure 2d,e). mean wetted widths ranged from 9.0 to 22.9 m (figure 2f). 3.2 | juvenile salmonid densities across the 10 reaches, densities of steelhead 0+ averaged 3.6, 15.4, and 11.5 fish per 100 m2 in the first, second, and third survey pe- riods, respectively (figure 2a). among reach variation during each survey period ranged between a cv of 65% and 107%, considerably higher than the variation in counts due to observer error (observer cv = 11%). densities of steelhead 1+ averaged 2.8, 2.4, and 0.9 fish per 100 m2 in the first, second, and third survey periods, respectively (figure 2b). among reach variation ranged between a cv of 82% and 153%, considerably higher than the variation in counts due to ob- server error (observer cv = 17%). densities of chinook averaged 2.4, 0.5, and 0.0 fish per 100 m2 in the first, second, and third survey peri- ods, respectively (figure 2c). among reach variation ranged between a cv of 86% and 214%, considerably higher than the variation in counts due to observer error (observer cv = 16%).     |  261 3.3 | factors associated with juvenile salmonid densities densities of all species and life stages differed across the three sur- vey periods (figure 3). steelhead 0+ densities differed among survey periods (f2,18 = 8.8, p = .002); densities increased between the first and second survey period (p = .0006) but did not differ between the second and third survey period (p = .11, figure 3a). steelhead 1+ den- sities differed among survey periods (f2,18 = 14.5, p = .0002); densities were similar between the first and second survey period (p = .60) and then decreased between the second and third survey period (p = .03, figure 3c). chinook salmon densities decreased across survey periods and were nearly absent in the third survey (two individuals observed across all sites in third survey). the lack of chinook salmon observa- tions in the third survey period violated assumptions of the statisti- cal model (heteroscedasticity in the residuals). when we analysed the data with first and second survey periods only, a difference between surveys was observed with lower densities in the second than the first survey period (f1,9 = 9.9, p = .01). the predicted values for all three survey periods were calculated to visualise change in chinook densi- ties over time (figure 3e). figure 3 association of juvenile salmonid densities (fish per 100 m2) with sample period and habitat metrics in 10 study reaches located between rkm 167.7 and 182.5 of the chehalis river, washington. densities among sample periods are shown for steelhead 0+ (a), steelhead 1+ (c), and chinook (e). thick black lines are the modelled fixed effect values and thin grey lines are individual reach values. parameter coefficients for each habitat and temperature metric are shown for steelhead 0+ (b), steelhead 1+ (d), and chinook (f). habitat and temperature metrics were scaled prior to analysis to show the effect size of each metric on fish densities. results shown are the parameter estimates and 95% confidence intervals for each parameter. parameters are significant (α < .05) if the confidence intervals do not overlap zero 262  |     habitat characteristics were a significant predictor of fish densi- ties for both species, although the importance of each metric differed by species and life stage. steelhead 0+ densities were associated with wetted width; higher densities were observed in reaches with narrower wetted channels (figure 3b). steelhead 1+ densities were associated with wetted width, residual pool length, and substrate size; higher densities were observed in reaches with narrower wet- ted channels, shorter pools, and larger substrate (figure 3d). chinook densities were associated with duration of temperature exceeding 18°c, residual pool length, and residual pool depth; higher densities were observed in reaches with less time above 18°c, and shorter and deeper pools (figure 3f). analysis of the chinook data included in- formation from the first and second survey periods only due to the absence of chinook in study reaches during the late (third) survey period. 3.4 | juvenile salmonid tagging and detections we tagged a total of 426 juvenile steelhead with an average length of 114.5 mm fl (range 65–175 mm fl) and an average condition factor of 1.17 (range 0.91–2.02). of the 426 tagged fish, 198 were tagged in reaches upstream of the detection array and 228 were tagged in reaches downstream of the detection array. juvenile steelhead detec- tions occurred on 96.7% of the days between june 27 and september 29 with 90% of the detections occurring prior to september 24. a total of 51 (25.8%) and 89 (39.0%) of the juvenile steelhead tagged upstream and downstream, respectively, were detected on at least 1 day. juvenile steelhead arrived from the farthest tagging reaches in both directions, travelling over 7 km during the study period. of the steelhead detected at least once, 83.2% of the individuals were de- tected on more than 1 day. together, these results demonstrated that juvenile steelhead moved upstream and downstream repeatedly near the detection array and that these movements persisted throughout the summer low flow period. we tagged 358 juvenile chinook salmon with an average length of 85.3 mm fl (range 65–108 mm fl) and an average condition factor of 1.29 (range 0.82–2.01). of the 358 tagged fish, 152 were tagged in reaches upstream of the detection array and 206 were tagged in reaches downstream of the detection array. detections of juve- nile chinook occurred on 88.9% of the days between june 27 and september 29 with 90% of the detections occurring prior to august 28. a total of 79 (52.0%) and 3 (1.4%) of the juvenile chinook tagged upstream and downstream, respectively, were detected on at least 1 day. of the chinook that were detected at least once, 14.5% of the fish were detected on more than 1 day. together these results demon- strated that juvenile chinook moved primarily downstream with fewer movements detected later in the study period when compared with steelhead. 3.5 | seasonal movements for juvenile steelhead arrival to the centre of the study area, information on release location and fish biological characteristics winkowski and zimmerman improved model fit over the null model (p < .01). two candidate models had strong support for predicting whether fish arrived at the detection array (∆aicc < 3, table 1). the top candidate model with the fewest parameters included two interactions, direction by distance and direction by fish condition. juvenile steelhead tagged upstream at a given distance from the centre of the study area were more likely to arrive at the array than fish tagged at similar distances downstream (direction by distance interaction; figure 4a). juvenile steelhead condition affected the likelihood of arrival at the centre of the study area if the fish originated downstream but not upstream of the array (direction by fish condition interaction; figure 4b). for steelhead travelling upstream to the detection array, tagged fish in poorer body condition were more likely to arrive than tagged fish in better body condition. due to the small numbers of juvenile chinook detected from downstream tagging reaches, we used two steps to analyse the vari- ables associated with juvenile chinook movements. in the first analy- sis, we used a generalised linear model with binomial distribution (logit link) to examine whether direction (predictor variable) was associated with the arrival of juvenile chinook (response variable) at the detection array. the model that included direction as a variable improved fit over the null model (p < .00) and had strong support compared to the null model (δaicc = 149.99, table 1). juvenile chinook released upstream of the detection array were more likely to be detected than those released downstream of the detection array, indicating that most of the detected fish were moving in a downstream direction (figure 4c). in the second step of the analysis, we conducted a model selection process limited to the data set of juvenile chinook tagged in reaches upstream of the detection array. models that included distance and fish biological variables did not improve fit over the null model to the table 1 model selection for predicting the arrival of tagged juvenile salmonids at a detection array located at rkm 175 in the upper chehalis river watershed (ll = log likelihood, δaic = difference between aic values, weight = akaike weight) species model parameters ll steelhead chinook (step 1) dir, dist, cond, dir:dist, dir:cond dir, dist, fl, cond, dir:dist, dir:cond null (intercept only) dir null (intercept only) δaicc 0.0 −187.8 −187.0 1.7 −240.1 −117.2 −193.2 94.5 0.0 150.0 weight 0.2 0.2 0.0 1.0 0.0 generalised linear regression models with a binomial distribution (logit link) were fit to tagging reach location (dir = direction up or downstream from array, dist = distance from array) and fish biological characteristics (fl = fork length, cond = fulton’s k condition factor). separate analyses were conducted for juvenile steelhead trout and chinook salmon. step 1 of the chinook analysis included direction as the only predictive variable. step 2 of the chinook analysis included all variables (except direction) for fish tagged upstream of the array. for step 2 of the chinook analysis, the goodness of fit test suggested the full model did not improve fit over the null model and results are not shown. results from top models (δaicc < 3) and null model (intercept only) are shown. winkowski and zimmerman figure 4 variables correlated with arrival (maiden detections) of juvenile salmonids at rkm 175 in the chehalis river between june 27 and september 29, 2014. results of the best models predicting the arrival of juvenile steelhead and chinook salmon are displayed: the probability of detection for juvenile steelhead as a function of distance and direction (a) and fish condition and direction (b), (direction = tagging location downstream or upstream relative to detection array), and the probability of detection for juvenile chinook salmon as a function of tagging location (c) arrival (p = .68) data, indicating that these variables did not provide additional information to explain juvenile chinook movements in the study area. 3.6 | daily movements for steelhead and chinook, the model that included temperature and flow was strongly supported over the models with either variable alone (steelhead: δaicc > 3, model weight = 0.8, chinook: δaicc > 10 and model weight = 1.0, table 2). however, for steelhead trout, nei- ther of the parameter values differed from zero (p > .3) and the plotted     |  263 table 2 model selection for daily movements of juvenile salmonids at rkm 175 of the chehalis river (ll = log likelihood, δaic = difference between aic values, weight = akaike weight) species chinook steelhead model parameters intercept, temperature, flow intercept, flow intercept, temperature intercept, temperature, flow intercept, temperature intercept, flow ll −96.7 −103.7 −131.7 −76.1 −79.6 −80.6 δaicc weight 0.0 1.0 10.1 66.0 0.0 3.1 5.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.2 0.1 generalised additive models with a poisson distribution and autoregres- sive moving average (1, 0) error structure were fit to stream temperature and flow data. separate analyses were conducted for juvenile chinook salmon and steelhead trout. relationship did not reveal a relationship between daily movements of juvenile steelhead and the environmental variables (figure 5d,e). in comparison, for chinook, all parameter values in the best model differed from zero and the plotted relationship revealed a nonlinear relationship between environmental variables and chinook move- ment. daily movements of juvenile chinook were more frequent on days when stream temperatures were warmer and stream flows were higher. daily movements declined as stream flows dropped below 0.94 m/s3 (33 f/s3) and mean stream temperatures dropped below 16°c (figure 5b,c). 3.7 | diel movements for juvenile steelhead, a total of 88 individual fish contributed 593 upstream and 421 downstream daily movements throughout the summer. a high proportion (80.1%) of directional movements were observed between the hours of 04:00–07:00 and 18:00–21:00 (figure 6a, c). between 04:00 and 07:00, the majority (82.0%) of ju- venile steelhead trout movements were in an upstream direction, whereas between 18:00 and 21:00, the majority (67.2%) of move- ments were in a downstream direction (figure 6a). for juvenile chinook, a total of 68 individual fish contributed to 10 upstream and 72 downstream movements throughout the summer. consistent with chinook seasonal movement observations, the ma- jority (87.8%) of daily movements occurred in a downstream direction and very few individuals were detected more than once. a high pro- portion (74.4%) of directional movements were observed between the hours of 20:00–04:00, indicating that juvenile chinook salmon were moving downstream during dark hours (figure 6b,c). 4 |  discussion this study examined the summer ecology of juvenile steelhead trout and chinook salmon in the context of both habitat use and movement behaviours. our results showed that the habitat and temperature 264  |     winkowski and zimmerman figure 5 daily movements of juvenile chinook salmon and steelhead trout detected at river kilometre 175 of the chehalis river between july 1 and september 29, 2014. times series of fish detections, stream flow, and stream temperature are shown in panel (a); values are scaled to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one for comparison. grey rectangle represents 5- day period in mid- september when the antenna array did not function properly and no detections were recorded. nonparametric relationship of daily movements with stream flow and temperature are shown for chinook salmon (b, c) and steelhead trout (d, e). solid line shows the predicted daily counts based on the smoothed function (s) from the generalised additive model; dashed lines are ±2 standard errors of the smoothed parameter characteristics of reaches approximately 200 m in length were con- sistent predictors of juvenile salmonid densities throughout the summer rearing period and that each species was associated with a particular suite of reach- scale habitat and temperature character- istics. in addition, we have presented evidence of extensive move- ment behaviour of juvenile salmonids that persisted during summer low flow conditions and differed among species. horizontal move- ments among habitat units within the study area increased the overall quantity of rearing habitat encountered by individual fishes during the summer low flow period and the prevalence of these movements suggests a much more dynamic river ecosystem during the summer months than would be interpreted from temporally static surveys of fish and habitat alone. 4.1 | fish densities and reach- scale characteristics fish- habitat associations have been a focus of stream studies for decades. understanding these associations enhances our understand- ing of fish function in the stream community, enables prediction of distribution or occupancy, and provides insight for impacts if stream alterations occur (beechie et al., 2010; roni, pess, beechie, & morley, 2010). this study was not designed to fully address the fish- habitat relationships specific to the chehalis river. rather we aimed to dem- onstrate that fish densities did differ based on the characteristics of the survey reaches and interpret our results in the context of the ex- tensive literature that has already identified habitat requirements for juvenile salmonids. steelhead 0+ densities changed over the summer season but were consistently highest in study reaches with narrow wetted widths. densities increased from first to second snorkel surveys and de- creased from the second to third snorkel surveys. the early increase in observed densities is likely explained by recently emerged fry utilis- ing margin habitat early in ontogeny (wydoski & whitney, 2003) and moving into deeper and swifter water as they grew throughout the summer months (everest & chapman, 1972). our method of mea- suring densities (i.e., snorkelling) was not conducive to sampling shal- low margin habitat and would have underestimated the numbers of steelhead fry in a reach if a high proportion were congregated in the margins in the first survey relative to the second and third surveys. visual inspection of the data series indicated that the relationship of steelhead 0+ with narrow wetted widths was likely driven by the two downstream most study reaches which were more than two times as winkowski and zimmerman     |  265 figure 6 directional movements by hour of the day for juvenile steelhead trout (a) and chinook salmon (b). mean hourly temperatures for july and august are displayed (c) with “dark,” “light,” and “c” (crepuscular), indicated by dark grey, light grey, and blue lines, respectively. “dark” was defined by all hours after sunset and before sunrise in july and august, “light” was defined by all hours after sunrise and before sunset in july and august, and “crepuscular” was approximated as the hours of which “light” and “dark” overlapped in july and august wide (25.5–28.5 m) as the other reaches and consistently had the low- est densities of steelhead 0+ throughout the summer low flow period. the other eight study sites had wetted widths within a small range (range 9.0–13.7 m) with variable densities over the summer. given the spatial context of the wetted widths and the relatively low sample size of our study reaches, variability in steelhead 0+ densities may have reflected spawning distributions and we are cautious to make any de- finitive interpretations from this particular result. steelhead 1+ densities decreased over time and were consistently associated with confined (narrow wetted width) study reaches char- acterised by large substrate and short pool lengths. these measured characteristics reflected the higher gradient study reaches character- ised by swifter and more turbulent flows compared to other study reaches in the study area. the association of steelhead 1+ with higher gradient reaches was consistent with previous findings from pacific northwest rivers. steelhead 1+ densities have been observed to be positively related to substrate size (everest & chapman, 1972). large substrate (e.g., boulders) provides cover, refuge from swift flows, and good habitat for aquatic invertebrates which juvenile steelhead forage upon (bjornn & reiser, 1991). in addition, juvenile steelhead possess a cylindrical, fusiform body shape that is advantageous in swifter moving water where they are often observed (bisson et al., 1988; dambacher, 1991). juvenile chinook densities were highest in reaches characterised by cooler stream temperatures (short durations of water tempera- tures above 18°c) and shorter, deep pools. juvenile chinook have been observed to prefer pool habitat during summer rearing and to be positively related to pool depth in terms of density and body size (holecek, cromwell, & kennedy, 2009; mossop & bradford, 2006; roper, scarnecchia, & la marr, 1994). in western washington, most chinook salmon spawners are ocean- type life history (l. campbell, washington department of fish and wildlife, personal communica- tion) with subyearlings that out- migrate to the ocean in late winter and early spring, while a smaller portion remains in freshwater to rear over the summer months (zimmerman, kinsel, beamer, connor, & pflug, 2015). therefore, the juvenile chinook observed in this study were those remaining in freshwater the longest of their cohort. juvenile chinook displaying this extended freshwater rearing occupied the 266  |     cooler stream reaches within the study area suggesting the expression of this life history may be associated with stream temperature. spatial context is important for interpreting the associations between fish and habitat documented in this study. our study area of 14.8 km was relatively short with respect to the main stem river which extends over 190 km from headwaters to the pacific ocean. studies conducted at broader spatial scales (30–70 km of river) over spatially continuous sections of river (e.g., a “riverscape” view, see fausch, torgersen, baxter, & li, 2002) have revealed that factors such as river location, stream gradient, and temperature determine the general distribution of aquatic species, whereas, within more limited spatial scales, species densities are associated with a different suite of reach- scale variables (torgersen & close, 2004; torgersen, gresswell, & bateman, 2004; torgersen, price, li, & mcintosh, 1999). a riverscape perspective of fish distribution in the chehalis river was developed in a companion study (m.s. zimmerman and j.j. winkowski, unpub- lished data) and identified salmonid versus cyprinid fish zonation in an upstream- downstream direction during the summer low flow period. the current study identifies reach- scale characteristics and individual movement patterns occurring within the juvenile salmonid rearing zone and results should be understood in this context. the reach- scale characteristics associated with fish species within our study area may be applicable to the headwaters of other sub- basins within the chehalis river watershed but will not necessarily be predictive fur- ther downstream in the main stem river due to additional large scale factors that appear to be influencing the overall distribution of fish species in this watershed. 4.2 | summer movements of juvenile salmonids we identified juvenile salmonid movement patterns at three time scales that differed between species. these results were significant with respect to the spatial extent and the temporal frequency of movements they revealed. while previous studies have documented little to no movement (edmundson et al., 1968) or small- scale move- ment (e.g., ≤1 km) of juvenile salmonids during summer flow condi- tions (armstrong et al., 2013; kahler et al., 2001), we documented juvenile salmonids moving over 7 km in both downstream and upstream directions. juvenile steelhead movements occurred in both upstream and downstream directions throughout the summer. however, overall movement behaviour differed between juvenile steelhead that were tagged upstream versus downstream of the array site. juvenile steel- head that moved upstream from downstream tagging locations were in poorer body condition at the time of tagging than those that did not move upstream. in comparison, body condition did not influence the probability that juvenile steelhead would move downstream to the array site. these contrasting results suggest that the benefits of or the motivations for moving depended on rearing environment at the beginning of the summer. one possible explanation for the condition- dependent movement in an upstream direction is interspecific compe- tition. the prevalence and densities of cyprinid species such as redside shiner richardsonius balteatus and northern pikeminnow ptychocheilus winkowski and zimmerman oregonensis were higher in reaches below the array site than reaches above the array site (m.s. zimmerman and j.j. winkowski, unpub- lished data). the competitive advantage of these cyprinid species with juvenile steelhead is believed to be greater at warmer than cooler stream temperatures (reese & harvey, 2002; reeves, everest, & hall, 1987). therefore, the upstream arrival of juvenile steelhead to the array site may have reflected the less successful competitors (i.e., those in poorer condition) that underwent upstream movements to reduce competitive interactions with the cyprinid species. based on the observed species distributions, juvenile steelhead upstream of the array site would have fewer interspecific interactions with cyprinids than those downstream and their downstream movements of up to 7 km require additional explanation. in the chehalis river, low flows during the summer months reduce the quantity of habitat available in any given reach of the river and juvenile steelhead that moved among habitat reaches increased the overall quantity of habitat encountered for feeding and growth. further evidence that the juvenile steelhead movements may be connected to energetics was provided by the ob- served daily and diel movement patterns. multiple individual juvenile steelhead were observed to be moving upstream and downstream more than once at the array site suggest- ing that horizontal movements were a prevalent component of juve- nile steelhead summer ecology. indeed, over 80% of the steelhead detected in our study were detected on multiple days over the sum- mer months. daily movements were not associated with daily stream temperatures or flows, but juvenile steelhead trout movements did have a detectable diel pattern that persisted throughout the season. juvenile steelhead moved upstream and downstream predominately at crepuscular time periods, similar to diel movement behaviour of brown_trout (salmo_trutta) studied in other river systems (bunnell jr, isely, burrell, & van lear, 1998; young, 1999). while our study was not designed to investigate mechanisms behind these movement pat- terns, other studies on juvenile salmonid summer movements may provide insight. foraging activity has been observed to be positively correlated with diel activity of juvenile brook_trout (salvelinus fontin- alis) (boisclair, 1992). likewise, in alaskan streams characterised by relatively cold temperatures, juvenile coho salmon underwent diel horizontal movements to consume food (salmon eggs) in cold areas and to digest food in warm areas of a stream (armstrong et al., 2013). rainbow trout that used horizontal movements to feed on the salmon eggs in these streams grew two and a half times larger than those that remained stationary (ruff et al., 2011). in contrast to the observations in cold alaskan streams, juvenile coho salmon have been observed to move horizontally and congregate into thermal refugia in rivers with warmer temperature regimes (sutton & soto, 2012). similarly, juvenile atlantic salmon (s. salar) in canadian rivers migrate towards cool water patches, or thermal refugia, during warm summer months (dugdale et al., 2015). summer temperatures in the chehalis river lie close to the upper extent of salmonid tolerance, similar to the stud- ies that linked horizontal migrations and access to thermal refugia. however, a connection between the diel horizontal movements of juvenile steelhead and thermal refugia in the chehalis river was not immediately apparent as juveniles moved downstream through the winkowski and zimmerman array site during the warmest daylight hours and upstream through the array site during the coolest hours of the night. multiple mecha- nisms may underlie daily movements of juvenile steelhead in this area of the chehalis river, and further investigation is required to under- stand these movements. in comparison to steelhead, juvenile chinook movements oc- curred in a downstream direction and were nearly completed by the end of august. very few juvenile chinook were detected more than once, suggesting that most individuals were undergoing a one- time downstream migration. our study design cannot definitively answer if the downstream migrating juvenile chinook were in immediate route to the estuary or ocean however an ocean- bound migration would be consistent with an ocean- type life history strategy observed in the chehalis river watershed (wydoski & whitney, 2003). taken together, the movement behaviour and reach- scale densities of juve- nile chinook provide a more complete picture of the role of stream temperature in their downstream migration. the observed association between daily downstream movements and stream temperatures sug- gests that warmer stream temperatures increased the rate of migra- tion of juvenile chinook out of a stream reach, similar to observations of juvenile chinook out migrations in other pacific northwest rivers (roper & scarnecchia 1999). in addition, the observed association be- tween higher densities of juvenile chinook and cooler stream reaches suggests that cooler stream temperatures increased residency of juve- nile chinook within a stream reach. 5 |  conclusion this study connects two important aspects of summer ecology of juve- nile salmonids, reach- scale habitat associations and horizontal move- ments among reaches. our results supported the concept that the summer ecology of juvenile salmonids requires both diverse habitat conditions and connectivity among habitat reaches. we also showed different types of connections between the reach- scale environment and movement behaviours of juvenile steelhead trout versus chinook salmon. whereas many studies have pointed to the importance of stream habitat for juvenile salmonids, fewer studies have focused on movements among individual habitat reaches. understanding how and why connectivity among habitat reaches is important for fish growth and survival is critical to anticipating the consequences of anthropo- genic impacts. anthropogenic changes to the stream environment such as dams, culverts, and even habitat restoration projects are often necessarily focused on a small spatial scale but have the potential to influence fish passage and connectivity of the river at a broader spatial scale when they interfere with the connectivity of the river environ- ment. while a more comprehensive study design is needed to identify the true home ranges of juvenile steelhead trout and chinook salmon during summer flow conditions, our results suggest that summer rear- ing habitat for juvenile salmonids may require a network of suitable habitat reaches at a scale of at least 7 km. in this study, we have identified the importance of connectivity among river reaches in both an upstream and downstream direction     |  267 for summer rearing of juvenile salmonids. in addition to increased understanding of the summer ecology of juvenile steelhead trout and chinook salmon, the results presented here are important be- cause the selected study area is the location of a proposed flood reduction dam in washington state. our study results suggest that one consequence of the proposed anthropogenic actions may be to interrupt the dynamic movements of juvenile salmonids that ap- pear to be prevalent among reaches of the river throughout the summer months. at this location, summer- time connectivity in an upstream direction may be particularly important for juvenile steelhead arriving from downstream locations, and connectivity in a downstream direction may be particularly important for juvenile chinook salmon leaving the upper watershed for the lower river and the ocean. acknowledgements amy edwards, riley freeman, brianna murphy, and eric walther (washington department of fish and wildlife, wdfw) collected field data. ben truscott (wdfw) and west fork environmental as- sisted with the siting and installation of pit antenna arrays. thomas buehrens (wdfw), jamie lamperth (wdfw), martin liermann (noaa – northwest fisheries science center), george pess (noaa— northwest fisheries science center), larry phillips (wdfw), and mark white (chehalis tribe) provided input on the study design and analy- sis. andrew weiss (wdfw) and dale gombert (wdfw) provided as- sistance with gis software. paul pickett (washington department of ecology) provided guidance on stream temperature monitoring pro- tocols. the manuscript was improved by the thoughtful comments of an anonymous reviewer. this study was funded by the washington state legislature. references aquatic species enhancement plan technical committee (2014). chehalis basin strategy: reducing flood damage and enhancing aquatic species. prepared for chehalis basin work group. retrieved from http:// chehalisbasinstrategy.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/aquatic- species-restoration-program-report_final.pdf. armstrong, j. b., schindler, d. e., ruff, c. p., brooks, g. t., bentley, k. e., & torgersen, c. e. (2013). diel horizontal migration in streams: juvenile fish exploit spatial heterogeneity in thermal and trophic resources. ecology, 94, 2066–2075. bates, d., mächler, m., bolker, b., & walker, s. (2014). fitting linear mixed- effects models using lme4. journal of statistical software, 67, 1–48. beechie, t. j., sear, d. a., olden, j. d., pess, g. r., buffington, j. m., moir, h., … pollock, m. m. (2010). process- based principles for restoring river ecosystems. bioscience, 60, 209–222. bisson, p. a., sullivan, k., & nielsen, j. l. (1988). channel hydraulics, habitat use, and body form of juvenile coho salmon, steelhead, and cutthroat trout in streams. transactions of the american fisheries society, 117, 262–273. bjornn, t., & reiser, d. (1991). habitat requirements of salmonids in streams. american fisheries society special publication, 19, 83–138. boisclair, d. (1992). relationship between feeding and activity rates for actively foraging juvenile brook_trout (salvelinus_fontinalis). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 49, 2566–2573. 268  |     bradford, m. j., & heinonen, j. s. (2008). low flows, instream flow needs and fish ecology in small streams. canadian water resources journal, 33, 165–180. bunnell jr, d. b., isely, j. j., burrell, k. h., & van lear, d. h. (1998). diel movement of brown_trout in a southern appalachian river. transactions of the american fisheries society, 127, 630–636. burnham, k. p., & anderson, d. r. (2002). model selection and multimodel inference: a practical information-theoretic approach. new york, ny: springer science & business media. dambacher, j. m.(1991). distribution, abundance, and emigration of juve- nile steelhead (oncorhynchus_mykiss), and analysis of stream habitat in the steamboat creek basin, oregon. corvallis, or: oregon state university. dobos, m. e., corsi, m. p., schill, d. j., dupont, j. m., & quist, m. c. (2016). influences of summer water temperatures on the movement, distri- bution, and resource use of fluvial westslope cutthroat trout in the south fork clearwater river basin. north american journal of fisheries management, 36, 549–567. dugdale, s. j., franssen, j., corey, e., bergeron, n. e., lapointe, m., & cunjak, r. a. (2015). main stem movement of atlantic salmon parr in response to high river temperature. ecology of freshwater fish, 25, 429–445. east, a. e., pess, g. r., bountry, j. a., magirl, c. s., & ritchie, a. c. (2014). large- scale dam removal on the elwha river, washington, usa: river channel and floodplain geomorphic change. geomorphology, 228, 765–786. edmundson, e., everest, f. e., & chapman, d. w. (1968). permanence of station in juvenile chinook salmon and steelhead trout. journal of the fisheries research board of canada, 25, 1453–1464. everest, f. h., & chapman, d. (1972). habitat selection and spatial inter- action by juvenile chinook salmon and steelhead trout in two idaho streams. journal of the fisheries board of canada, 29, 91–100. fausch, k. d., & northcote, t. g. (1992). large woody debris and salmonid habitat in a small coastal british columbia stream. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 49, 682–693. fausch, k. d., torgersen, c. e., baxter, c. v., & li, h. w. (2002). landscapes to riverscapes: bridging the gap between research and conservation of stream fishes a continuous view of the river is needed to understand how processes interacting among scales set the context for stream fishes and their habitat. bioscience, 52, 483–498. gowan, c., & fausch, k. d. (2002). why do foraging stream salmonids move during summer? environmental biology of fishes, 64, 139–153. hokanson, k. e., kleiner, c. f., & thorslund, t. w. (1977). effects of con- stant temperatures and diel temperature fluctuations on specific growth and mortality rates and yield of juvenile rainbow trout, salmo gairdneri. journal of the fisheries board of canada, 34, 639–648. holecek, d. e., cromwell, k. j., & kennedy, b. p. (2009). juvenile chinook salmon summer microhabitat availability, use, and selection in a central idaho wilderness stream. transactions of the american fisheries society, 138, 633–644. hothorn, t., bretz, f., & westfall, p. (2008). simultaneous inference in gen- eral parametric models. biometrical journal, 50, 346–363. kahler, t. h., roni, p., & quinn, t. p. (2001). summer movement and growth of juvenile anadromous salmonids in small western washington streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 58, 1947–1956. korner-nievergelt, f., roth, t., von felten, s., guélat, j., almasi, b., & korner-nievergelt, p. (2015). bayesian data analysis in ecology using lin- ear models with r, bugs, and stan. cambridge, ma: academic press. lisle thomas, e. (1987). using “residual depths” to monitor pool depths in- dependently of discharge (pp. 4). res. note psw-rn-394. berkeley, ca: u.s. department of agriculture, forest service, pacific southwest forest and range experiment station. lonzarich, d. g., franckowiak, r. p., & allen, m. d. (2009). summer move- ments of juvenile coho salmon under variable stream flow conditions. transactions of the american fisheries society, 138, 397–406. winkowski and zimmerman madej, m. a. (1999). temporal and spatial variability in thalweg profiles of a gravel- bed river. earth surface processes and landforms, 24, 1153–1169. madej, m. a., currens, c., ozaki, v., yee, j., & anderson, d. (2006). assessing possible thermal rearing restrictions for juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) through thermal infrared imaging and in- stream monitoring, redwood creek, california. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 63, 1384–1396. magoulick, d. d., & kobza, r. m. (2003). the role of refugia for fishes during drought: a review and synthesis. freshwater biology, 48, 1186–1198. mazerolle, m. j. (2011). aiccmodavg: model selection and multimodel infer- ence based on (q) aic (c). r package version 1. vienna, austria. http:// www.r-project.org/. mcphail, j., & lindsey, c. (1986). zoogeography of the freshwater fishes of cascadia (the columbia system and rivers north to the stikine). in ch hocutt (ed.), the zoogeography of north american freshwater fishes (pp. 615–637). hoboken, nj: wiley. montgomery, d. r., beamer, e. m., pess, g. r., & quinn, t. p. (1999). channel type and salmonid spawning distribution and abundance. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 56, 377–387. mossop, b., & bradford, m. j. (2004). importance of large woody debris for juvenile chinook salmon habitat in small boreal forest streams in the upper yukon river basin, canada. canadian journal of forest research, 34, 1955–1966. mossop, b., & bradford, m. j. (2006). using thalweg profiling to assess and monitor juvenile salmon (oncorhynchus spp.) in small streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 63, 1515–1525. murphy, b. r., & willis, d. w. (1996). fisheries techniques, 2nd edition. bethesda, md: american fisheries society. nickelson, t. e., rodgers, j. d., johnson, s. l., & solazzi, m. f. (1992). seasonal changes in habitat use by juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) in oregon coastal streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 49, 783–789. peterson, n. (1982). immigration of juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) into riverine ponds. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 39, 1308–1310. r core team (2016). r: a language and environment for statistical computing. vienna, austria: r foundation for statistical computing. http://www.r- project.org/. reese, c. d., & harvey, b. c. (2002). temperature- dependent interactions between juvenile steelhead and sacramento pikeminnow in laboratory streams. transactions of the american fisheries society, 131, 599–606. reeves, g. h., everest, f. h., & hall, j. d. (1987). interactions between the redside shiner (richardsonius balteatus) and the steelhead trout (salmo gairdneri) in western oregon: the influence of water temperature. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 44, 1603–1613. reeves, g. h., everest, f. h., & nickelson, t. e.(1989). identification of phys- ical habitats limiting the production of coho salmon in western oregon and washington. portland, or, us department of agriculture. forest service, pacific northwest research station. reeves, g. h., sleeper, j. d., & lang, d. w. (2011). seasonal changes in habitat availability and the distribution and abundance of salmonids along a stream gradient from headwaters to mouth in coastal oregon. transactions of the american fisheries society, 140, 537–548. rieman, b., & chandler, g.(1999). empirical evaluation of temperature ef- fects on bull trout distribution in the northwest. final report to us environmental protection agency, boise, idaho. roni, p., pess, g., beechie, t., & morley, s. (2010). estimating changes in coho salmon and steelhead abundance from watershed restoration: how much restoration is needed to measurably increase smolt produc- tion? north american journal of fisheries management, 30, 1469–1484. roper, b.b. & scarnecchia, d.l. 1999. emigration of age-0 chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha) smolts from the upper south umpqua river basin, oregon, usa. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 56: 939-946. winkowski and zimmerman roper, b. b., scarnecchia, d. l., & la marr, t. j. (1994). summer distribution of and habitat use by chinook salmon and steelhead within a major basin of the south umpqua river, oregon. transactions of the american fisheries society, 123, 298–308. rosenfeld, j., porter, m., & parkinson, e. (2000). habitat factors affecting the abundance and distribution of juvenile cutthroat trout (oncorhynchus clarki) and coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences, 57, 766–774. ruff, c. p., schindler, d. e., armstrong, j. b., bentley, k. t., brooks, g. t., holtgrieve, g. w., … seeb, j. e. (2011). temperature- associated popula- tion diversity in salmon confers benefits to mobile consumers. ecology, 92, 2073–2084. schmetterling, d. a., & adams, s. b. (2004). summer movements within the fish community of a small montane stream. north american journal of fisheries management, 24, 1163–1172. stradmeyer, l., höjesjö, j., griffiths, s., gilvear, d., & armstrong, j. (2008). competition between brown_trout and atlantic salmon parr over pool refuges during rapid dewatering. journal of fish biology, 72, 848–860. stroup, w. w. (2012). generalized linear mixed models: modern concepts, methods and applications. boca raton, fl: crc press. sutton, r., & soto, t. (2012). juvenile coho salmon behavioural charac- teristics in klamath river summer thermal refugia. river research and applications, 28, 338–346. torgersen, c. e., & close, d. a. (2004). influence of habitat heterogeneity on the distribution of larval pacific lamprey (lampetra tridentata) at two spatial scales. freshwater biology, 49, 614–630. torgersen, c. e., gresswell, r. e., & bateman, d. s. (2004). pattern detection in stream networks: quantifying spatial variability in fish distribution. gis/spatial analyses in fishery and aquatic sciences, 2, 405–420. torgersen, c. e., price, d. m., li, h. w., & mcintosh, b. a. (1999). multiscale thermal refugia and stream habitat associations of chinook salmon in northeastern oregon. ecological applications, 9, 301–319.     |  269 tucker, s., thiess, m., morris, j., mackas, d., peterson, w., candy, j., … peterson, m. (2015). coastal distribution and consequent factors in- fluencing production of endangered snake river sockeye salmon. transactions of the american fisheries society, 144, 107–123. wolman, m. g. (1954). a method of sampling coarse river- bed material. eos, transactions american geophysical union, 35, 951–956. wood, s. (2006). generalized additive models: an introduction with r. boca raton, fl: crc press. wood, s. n. (2011). fast stable restricted maximum likelihood and mar- ginal likelihood estimation of semiparametric generalized linear models. journal of the royal statistical society: series b (statistical methodology), 73, 3–36. wydoski, r. s., & whitney, r. r. (2003). inland fishes of washington. bethesda, md: american fisheries society. young, m. (1999). summer diel activity and movement of adult brown_trout in high- elevation streams in wyoming, usa. journal of fish biology, 54, 181–189. zimmerman, m. s., kinsel, c., beamer, e., connor, e. j., & pflug, d. e. (2015). abundance, survival, and life history strategies of juvenile chinook salmon in the skagit river, washington. transactions of the american fisheries society, 144, 627–641. zuur, a. f., ieno, e. n., & saveliev, a. a. (2009). mixed effects models and extensions in ecology with r. new york, ny: springer. how to cite this article: winkowski jj, zimmerman ms. summer habitat and movements of juvenile salmonids in a coastal river of washington state. ecol freshw fish. 2018;27:255–269. https://doi.org/10.1111/eff.12344  