ecology of freshwater fish 2000: 9: 145–152 printed in denmark ` all rights reserved copyright c munksgaard 2000 issn 0906-6691 the effects of an underwater ﬁsh observation technique on stream macroinvertebrates at two spatial scales petty jt, grossman gd. the effects of an underwater ﬁsh observation technique on stream macroinvertebrates at two spatial scales. ecology of freshwater fish 2000: 9: 145–152. c munksgaard, 2000 j. t. petty, g. d. grossman warnell school of forest resources, university of georgia athens, usa abstract – we examined the effects of snorkeling, a commonly used ﬁsh observation technique, on the distribution and abundance of benthic mac- roinvertebrates at both the reach (i.e., 10 m) and patch scale (i.e.,(cid:176) 1 m) within a southern appalachian stream (north carolina, usa). at the reach scale, we quantiﬁed increases in macroinvertebrate drift rates associ- ated with snorkeling and used these values to calculate the percentage of the macrobenthos that drifted out of snorkeled reaches. we also used a simple decay model of macroinvertebrate drift to quantify patch scale effects of snorkeling. the model incorporated size speciﬁc macroinvert- ebrate settling rates to estimate the total number of benthic macroinvert- ebrates that entered the drift in response to snorkeling disturbance. we found that snorkeling consistently produced signiﬁcant increases in the number of drifting macroinvertebrates. nevertheless, these increases com- prised a very small percentage ((cid:176)1%) of the total number of organisms in the benthos, suggesting that snorkeling probably did not strongly affect macroinvertebrate assemblages at either the reach or patch scale. how- ever, our analyses also indicated that snorkeling had a disproportionate effect on the drift of small ephemeropterans (4–5% entered the drift in response to snorkeling) relative to other macroinvertebrate taxa. conse- quently, the microdistribution of early instar mayﬂies may have been altered within snorkeled reaches. we conclude that snorkeling related dis- turbance to the benthos should have a minimal effect on the behavior and distribution of most stream ﬁshes at either the reach or patch scale. however, because snorkeling had a substantial effect on the drift of small mayﬂies, snorkeling may inﬂuence the behavior of ﬁshes that depend on early instar mayﬂies as a primary food resource. key words: observation technique; macroinvertebrate; stream j. tood petty, wildlife and fisheries department, division of forestry, west virginia university, morgantown, wv 26506, usa accepted for publication august 9, 1999 un resumen en espan˜ol se incluye detra´s del texto principal de este artı´culo. stream ecologists use a variety of techniques to sample ﬁshes, including seining, electroﬁshing and traps (murphy & willis 1996). increasingly, how- ever, researchers are using direct observational techniques (i.e., snorkeling and scuba) to quan- tify a variety of biological characteristics of stream ﬁshes (dolloff et al. 1996). for example, under- water observations have been used to estimate ﬁsh abundance (hankin & reeves 1988) and to charac- terize microhabitat use and foraging behavior of stream ﬁshes (moyle & baltz 1985; rinco´n & lo- bo´n-cervia´ 1993; petty & grossman 1996). the primary advantage of snorkeling is that it enables the observer to identify the exact locations of indi- vidual ﬁshes within the stream with little apparent effect on their behavior (heggenes et al. 1990). although underwater observational techniques such as snorkeling may not directly affect ﬁsh be- havior, snorkeling may have an indirect effect by al- tering the distribution and abundance of ﬁshes’ ben- thic macroinvertebrate prey. the potential effect of snorkeling on macroinvertebrates in small, shallow streams is particularly high. in these habitats, a snorkeler may physically disturb the stream benthos 145 petty & grossman by coming into direct contact with the substratum or by altering stream ﬂow. because benthic macroin- vertebrates often respond to physical disturbance by entering the drift (poff et al. 1991), snorkeling may indirectly affect stream ﬁshes in two ways. first, at the reach scale (i.e., stream segments typically –10 m in length), if a large number of macroinvertebrat- es enter the drift and ultimately drift out of a stream reach, then snorkeling may lead to a signiﬁcant re- duction in the density of benthic macroinvertebrate prey within the snorkeled area. furthermore, be- cause certain species and size classes are more prone to drift (waters 1962; allan 1978), disturbance to the benthos may alter the size and taxonomic com- position of macroinvertebrate assemblages within snorkeled reaches. the second manner in which snorkeling may affect the behavior of stream ﬁshes occurs at the microhabitat or patch scale (i.e., areas (cid:176)1 m2 used by an individual). our studies of patch selection by mottled sculpin, a predatory benthic stream ﬁsh, indicate that sculpin foraging behavior is strongly affected by the microdistribution (i.e., within reach distribution) of their invertebrate prey (petty & grossman 1996; petty 1998). conse- quently, patch use by this species, and other benthic ﬁshes, may be affected if snorkeling activities alter the microdistribution of benthic macroinverteb- rates. there are no studies although snorkeling could conceivably produce changes in the distribution and abundance of stream ﬁshes via an effect on the benthos, to our knowledge that have attempted to quantify the impact of snorkeling on benthic stream macroinvertebrates. given the in- creasing importance of direct observational tech- niques in stream ﬁsh ecology, we decided to con- duct a short-term experiment to evaluate the ef- fects of snorkeling on benthic macroinvertebrates at both the reach and patch scales. speciﬁcally, our study addressed three questions: 1) does snor- keling affect the number and composition (size and taxonomic) of macroinvertebrates drifting out of sampled reaches? 2) does snorkeling affect the density and composition (size and taxonomic) of benthic macroinvertebrates within sampled reaches? and 3) does snorkeling affect the microdi- stribution of benthic macroinvertebrates within sampled reaches? we then used answers to these questions to assess the likelihood that snorkeling would produce behavioral changes in ﬁshes via its effects on macroinvertebrate drift. methods study site and sampling regime we examined the effects of snorkeling on macroin- vertebrate drift in shope fork, a fourth-order 146 stream located on the usda forest service co- weeta hydrologic laboratory. the laboratory is situated in the blue ridge province of the southern appalachian mountains in western north carolina. our study was conducted in september 1994 during a period of normal, late summer base- ﬂow (i.e., 0.23 m3/s). during summer months, ben- thic invertebrate densities and invertebrate drift rates are signiﬁcantly lower than during other sea- sons (e.g., ealy spring) (stouder 1990). however, macroinvertebrate assemblages in september are representative of assemblages present in this sys- tem throughout much of the growing season (i.e., june–october) (petty & grossman 1996). we con- ducted our study in late summer because we felt that snorkeling effects on the benthos would be most likely during low-water periods. we snorkel- ed and collected drift and benthic samples during daylight hours (11:00 am–4:00 pm). this sampling regime was chosen because it is typical of the ob- servation schedules used in most studies of ﬁsh microhabitat use (paine et al. 1982; moyle & baltz 1985; grossman et al. 1998). this seemed reason- able given that our objective was to evaluate the potential indirect effects of snorkeling on ﬁsh be- havior in streams. nevertheless, because macroin- vertebrate drift rates often follow a distinct diel periodicity (i.e., drift rates are generally low during the day and peak at dusk; waters 1962), we recog- nize that our results are most applicable to snor- keling studies conducted during daylight hours only. the study site consisted of three 10-m reaches located just downstream of a gaging weir at •700 m elevation. at this elevation, shope fork has an average width of 5.2 m (range‰3.9–6.0 m) and the substratum is dominated by cobble and gravel. the three 10 m reaches that we selected were phys- ically similar, each consisting of a single, continu- ous rifﬂe. we selected reaches of this length, be- cause 10 m is the approximate average length of rifﬂes within shope fork at this elevation (petty 1998). furthermore, we selected reaches that con- tained only rifﬂes, because the potential effects of snorkeling probably are greater in these habitats than in deeper pools and runs. hence, our esti- mates of snorkel effects on the benthos probably are higher than they would be if we had included a variety of habitat types. reach-scale effects of snorkeling our ﬁrst objective was to determine whether snor- keling had a signiﬁcant effect on the number and composition (size and taxonomic) of macroinverte- brates drifting out of sampled reaches. we began by making control observations, which consisted for (1998) of three 15-minute-long drift samples collected during a time in which no snorkeling activities were conducted. at the downstream end of each rifﬂe, we placed three drift nets (30(cid:192)30 cm frames ﬁtted with 250-mm mesh) at equal distances across the width of the stream. the nets sampled the en- tire water column from substratum to surface. after 15 minutes elapsed, the contents of each net were emptied into separate bags and preserved with a 10% formalin solution for processing in the lab. immediately following the control sets, the drift nets were reset in the same locations, and a snorkeler began searching for ﬁshes in a 10-m sec- tion of stream directly upstream of the drift nets (see grossman et al. snorkeling methods). this process took between 12 and 15 minutes. when the snorkeler reached the upper boundary of the study reach, he carefully exited the stream and waited to remove the nets at the end of the 15-minute period. after collecting drift samples, we measured the depth and average cur- rent velocity (cm/s) at the location of each drift net. depth was measured using a meter stick and current velocity was measured with a marsh- mcbirney model 201 electronic ﬂow meter. we then took identical measurements at 10 randomly selected locations within each reach. for compara- tive purposes, we collected ﬁve benthic samples taken from an adjacent segment of shope fork with a modiﬁed hess sampler (0.1 m2 opening, 250-mm mesh). previous research has indicated that ﬁve samples are sufﬁcient to describe benthic macroinvertebrate density and composition on a given date within this system (stouder 1990). in the laboratory we identiﬁed macroinverteb- rates to family. we also classiﬁed individuals as being either small or large on the basis of head capsule size (hcsz) (small: hcsz (cid:176)1.0 mm; large: hcsz >1.0 mm). estimates of macroinvert- ebrate drift rates for both the control and snorkel treatments were deﬁned as the total number of macroinvertebrates captured in drift nets per min- ute. because we set the drift nets in the same posi- tions for both the control and the snorkel treat- ments, we did not standardize drift rates on the basis of current velocity or depth. to determine the effects of snorkeling on the drift rates of mac- roinvertebrates in shope fork, we used paired t- tests to test the null hypothesis that macroinvert- ebrate drift rates did not differ signiﬁcantly be- tween control and snorkel treatments. we con- ducted separate analyses on large and small mac- roinvertebrates. to assess the effects of snorkeling on the size and taxonomic composition of drift from dis- turbed reaches, we tested two separate null hypo- theses. first, we tested the null hypothesis that the snorkeling effects in streams size and taxonomic composition of macroinvert- ebrate drift in the control samples was not signiﬁ- cantly different from the composition of macroin- vertebrates present in the benthos. second, we tested the null hypothesis that the composition (size and taxonomic) of the drift from the snorkel samples did not differ signiﬁcantly from that of the control. we compared the relative abundance of major macroinvertebrate taxa (i.e., macroinvert- ebrate orders) and size classes (i.e., small and large) in the different sampling categories (i.e., benthos, control drift, and snorkel drift) with par- titioned chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt tests. the second objective of our reach scale analysis was to determine whether snorkeling had a sig- niﬁcant effect on the density and composition of benthic macroinvertebrates within snorkeled reaches. we used benthic samples taken in adjacent reaches along with estimates of ‘‘snorkel effect’’ to estimate the proportion of benthic macroinverteb- rates that drifted out of a reach as a result of snor- keling activities. we deﬁned the snorkel effect as the total number of macroinvertebrates drifting out of a reach in response to snorkeling disturb- ance and calculated its magnitude by subtracting the number of drifting macroinvertebrates cap- tured in control samples from the number captured in the snorkeling samples. snorkel effect estimates were then standardized by the area sampled. we assumed that each drift net sampled from an area of 3 m2, an area that corresponds to the width of a single net (0.3 m) multiplied by the total distance snorkeled (10 m). the proportion of the macro- benthos that drifts out of the study site due to snorkeling equals the area standardized snorkel ef- fect divided by the density of macroinvertebrates in the benthos. we calculated this proportion sep- arately for each taxon and size class. we also esti- mated the expected change in the composition of the benthos as a result of macroinvertebrates drift- ing out of a snorkeled reach. we used chi-square analysis to test the null hypothesis of no signiﬁcant differences in the composition (size and taxo- nomic) of benthic macroinvertebrates in the con- trol and snorkeled benthos. patch-scale effects of snorkeling a potentially important effect of snorkeling on the stream benthos involves the redistribution of ben- thic macroinvertebrates within a reach as disturbed individuals enter the drift and resettle in other areas. consequently, quantifying patch scale ef- fects requires an estimate of the total number of individuals that enter the drift in response to snor- keling activities, an estimate that includes individ- uals that drift completely out of a reach as well as 147 petty & grossman individuals that resettle before reaching the down- stream border. we used a model originally de- veloped by mclay (1970) to estimate the total number of macroinvertebrates entering the drift in response to snorkeling activities. under this model, a pulse of organisms enters the drift after a disturbance and then subsequently returns to the substratum according to the simple negative expo- nential relationship: nx ‰ n0e»rx (1) where: n0 is the number of macroinvertebrates that initially enter the water column, nx is the number of individuals remaining in the drift at dis- tance x from the point of introduction, and r is a constant reﬂecting the rate of settling to the sub- stratum by drifting macroinvertebrates. previous applications of this model either have sought to estimate the number of macroinverteb- rates remaining in the drift (nx) based on initial abundance (n0) and drift distance (x), or they have used estimates of nx and n0 to estimate taxon-speciﬁc settling coefﬁcients (r) (elliott 1971; allan & feifarek 1989). in contrast, we used the model to estimate the initial number of macroin- vertebrates entering the drift (n0) on the basis of the number of macroinvertebrates remaining in the drift (nx) and drift distance (x). to derive these estimates, we employed three simplifying assump- tions. first, each sample reach was viewed as a series of 1-m-wide cross-sections, and all points within a given section were assumed to be the same distance from the drift nets downstream. for ex- ample, all locations within the 0- to 1-m cross-sec- tion were considered to be 1 m from the nets. sec- ond, we assumed that the initial number of macro- invertebrates entering the drift from each cross- section was equal. (note: failure to meet this as- sumption does not affect our estimates of n0 as long as the true n0 does not consistently increase or decrease with distance.) third, we assumed that ﬂows were constant across each of the 1-m cross- sections. again, failure to meet this assumption table 1. reach- and size-speciﬁc settling coefﬁcients (r) used in calculating n0 (i.e., the patch scale effect of snorkeling). settling coefﬁcients were deter- mined on the basis of mean average current velocity (cm/s) in each reach and relationships between settling rate and current velocity developed by al- lan & feifarek (1989) for cinygmulaof the form r‰av»b. settling coefﬁcient average small large reach current velocity macroinvertebrates macroinvertebrates 28.6 22.3 23.5 0.297 0.390 0.368 0.572 0.792 0.740 1 2 3 148 should not affect our estimates as long as there was no consistent variation in ﬂows as a function of distance from the drift nets. given these as- sumptions, the number of insects that reach the downstream nets from cross-section x equals nx from equation 2. furthermore, the total number of insects that reach the downstream nets from all sections combined equals the sum of the nx’s across all sections. the general form of this re- lationship can be written as: on x‰1 nx ‰ on x‰1 n0 (x) e»rx (2) (1)‰n0 where: n equals the number of cross-sections (n‰ 10 in our study). because we assumed that n0 is (2)‰...‰ constant across sections (i.e., n0 (n)), we could easily solve for n0. n0 we used published relationships between settling rate and current velocity to estimate reach speciﬁc settling coefﬁcients (i.e., r) for both small and large macroinvertebrates (table 1). because small ephemerellid and heptageniid mayﬂies dominated our drift samples, we used settling relationships for cinygmula (see allan & feifarek 1989), a morpho- logically generalized heptageniid, to estimate set- tling coefﬁcients for small and large macroinverte- brates in shope fork (small macroinvertebrates: a‰11.5, b‰»1.09; large macroinvertebrates: a‰ 45.68, b‰»1.306). note that the rate at which drifting macroinvertebrates settle to the sub- stratum increases with decreasing current velocity and increasing macroinvertebrate size (table 1). estimates of nx were based on estimates of the snorkel effect (see above) from each sample reach. this provided an estimate of the total number of macroinvertebrates remaining in the drift that ini- tially entered the drift in response to snorkeling disturbance. we then used reach speciﬁc estimates of nx and r to calculate the total number of indi- viduals from each taxon and size class that enter the drift in response to snorkeling activities (i.e., size- and taxon-speciﬁc n0). finally, we used area standardized estimates of n0 and estimates of ben- thic macroinvertebrate densities to quantify the proportion of macroinvertebrates within the ben- thos that enter the drift as a result of snorkeling activities. these estimates were made for each taxon and size class separately. if snorkeling has a signiﬁcant effect on the microdistribution of mac- roinvertebrates within disturbed reaches, then a relatively large percentage of the macrobenthos should enter the drift in response to snorkeling ac- tivities. alternatively, if snorkeling effects at the microhabitat scale are insigniﬁcant, then a rela- tively small percentage of the macrobenthos is ex- pected to enter the drift. results reach-scale effects of snorkeling snorkeling effects in streams snorkeling within shope fork had a signiﬁcant ef- fect on the drift rates of both large and small mac- roinvertebrates. the drift of small macroinverteb- rates increased signiﬁcantly (t‰»5.63; d.f.‰8; p(cid:176)0.001) from an average baseline rate of 5.5”1.4 individuals/min to a rate of 57.8”11.1 individuals/ min during snorkeling activities. similarly, snor- keling within the study site caused a signiﬁcant (t‰ »3.0; d.f.‰8; p‰0.02) increase in the drift rate of large macroinvertebrates (control drift‰0.10”0.02 individuals/min; snorkel drift‰0.32”0.14 individ- uals/min). snorkeling also had a signiﬁcant effect on the size and taxonomic composition of the macroin- vertebrate drift. the relative abundance of small macroinvertebrates in the drift increased signiﬁ- cantly (c2‰22.9; d.f.‰1; p(cid:176)0.01) from 98.2% in the control samples to 99.5% in the snorkel samples. in addition, there was a shift in the taxo- nomic composition of the drift as a result of snor- keling disturbance (fig. 1). speciﬁcally, the relative abundance of ephemeropterans within the drift in- creased signiﬁcantly during snorkeling activities (fig. 1). comparison of drift samples with benthic samples taken in shope fork indicated that the most important effect of snorkeling was to increase the drift of macroinvertebrates with a naturally high propensity to drift. for example, the relative abundance of small macroinvertebrates within control drift samples (97.8%) was signiﬁcantly higher than expected based on the composition of the benthos (96.2%) (c2‰ 7.81; d.f.‰1; p(cid:176)0.05), suggesting a naturally high propensity to enter the drift for these macroinvertebrates. previous analy- ses indicated that the primary effect of snorkeling was to intensify the drift rates of small macroinver- tebrates. differences in the taxonomic composition of drift samples and the undisturbed benthos dem- onstrated a similar pattern (fig. 1). under natural conditions, ephemeropterans exhibited an ex- tremely high propensity to drift relative to other taxa (fig. 1). differences between snorkel and con- trol drift samples further demonstrated that the high propensity of small mayﬂies to drift under normal conditions was intensiﬁed by snorkeling activities (fig. 1). although snorkeling increased macroinvertebr- ate drift rates and altered the size and taxonomic composition of the drift, our analyses indicated that snorkeling did not have a signiﬁcant effect on either the density or composition of the macro- benthos at the reach scale (table 2). the percen- tage of the total macrobenthos that drifted out of fig. 1. percentage composition of major macroinvertebrate taxa in benthic and drift samples. we made statistical comparisons between the benthos and control drift samples and between the control drift and snorkel drift samples. partitioned c2 analyses indicated signiﬁcant differences (p(cid:176)0.05) in the percentage con- tribution of the underlined taxa (benthos vs control drift: c2‰ 193, d.f.‰4, p(cid:176)0.01; control drift vs snorkel drift: c2‰217, d.f.‰4, p(cid:176)0.01). 149 petty & grossman table 2. effect of snorkeling disturbance on benthic macroinvertebrates at the reach scale. the snorkel effect (mean”se) is the total number of macroinvert- ebrates drifting out of a reach in response to snorkeling, standardized by the area sampled. also presented is the percentage of each taxon and size class that drifted out of reaches in shope fork in response to snorkeling. taxon/size class diptera ephemeroptera plecoptera trichoptera miscellaneous small macroinvertebrates large macroinvertebrates all macroinvertebrates snorkel effect (number per m2) % benthos leaving reaches 43 (9) 127 (56) 3 (1) 2 (1) 1 (1) 175 (64) 1 (1) 176 (65) 0.13 1.10 0.06 0.05 0.01 0.27 0.09 0.27 table 3. effect of snorkeling disturbance on benthic macroinvertebrates at the patch scale. we have presented the mean (”se) number of macroinverte- brates per m2 that entered the drift in response to snorkeling activities. also presented is the percentage of the macrobenthos entering the drift for each taxon and size class. taxon/size class diptera ephemeroptera plecoptera trichoptera miscellaneous small macroinvertebrates large macroinvertebrates all macroinvertebrates number per m2 entering drift % benthos entering drift 188 (65) 522 (217) 11 (4) 4 (3) 2 (4) 722 (272) 6 (4) 727 (275) 0.57 4.50 0.20 0.10 0.02 1.13 0.54 1.12 a reach as a result of snorkeling disturbance was much less than 1% (table 2). in fact, with the ex- ception of ephemeroptera, the percentage of the benthos that left a reach due to snorkeling activi- ties generally was less than 0.5% (table 2). given these ﬁndings, it is not surprising that we failed to detect signiﬁcant differences in either the size or taxonomic composition of the macrobenthos of control or snorkeled samples (size: c2‰0.02, d.f.‰ 1, p–0.5; taxon: c2‰0.1; d.f.‰4; p–0.5). patch-scale effects of snorkeling because most drifting macroinvertebrates resettled into the benthos before reaching the downstream border of snorkeled reaches, our patch-scale esti- mates of snorkeling disturbance were considerably higher than our reach-scale estimates. application of mclay’s (1970) model of invertebrate drift to our data indicated that the number of individuals entering the drift in response to snorkeling was ap- 150 proximately four times greater than our estimates of snorkel effect at the reach scale (table 3). never- theless, the overall effect of snorkeling on macroin- vertebrate distributions at the patch scale re- mained very small. similar to our ﬁndings at the reach scale, the total number of macroinvertebrat- es entering the drift in response to snorkeling ac- tivities represented a very small percentage (ap- proximately 1%) of the total macrobenthos (table 3). although our results demonstrate that the ef- fects of snorkeling on the distribution and abun- dance of macroinvertebrates in shope fork were minimal, they also suggest that this technique may have signiﬁcantly affected the distribution of small ephemeropterans within reaches. the number of early instar mayﬂies that entered the drift in re- sponse to snorkeling was considerably higher than it was for other taxa and represented nearly 5% of mayﬂies present in the benthos (table 3). conse- quently, snorkeling may have altered the distri- bution of this taxon within snorkeled reaches, even though it is unlikely that snorkeling affected the microdistribution of the overall macrobenthic as- semblage. discussion snorkeling consistently produced increases in the overall number of macroinvertebrates entering the drift (i.e., microhabitat-scale effects) and leaving the site (i.e., reach-scale effects). nevertheless, the observed increases in the number of drifting mac- roinvertebrates represented a very low percentage of the macroinvertebrates found in the benthos. in fact, we found that only about 1% of all benthic macroinvertebrates entered the drift in response to snorkeling, and most of these organisms settled back into the substratum before drifting out of the affected reaches. consequently, our data indicate that snorkeling did not signiﬁcantly affect the den- sity, composition, or size structure of the benthic macroinvertebrate present within sampled reaches. furthermore, given the small percentage of macrobenthos entering the drift, it is unlikely that snorkeling affected overall benthic macroinvertebrate distributions at the patch scale. our results are very similar to those of other investigators who examined the effects of ﬁsh sam- pling procedures on macroinvertebrate drift rates in streams. researchers have shown that, although a given ﬁsh sampling procedure may induce sig- niﬁcant increases in macroinvertebrate drift rates, sampling activities generally have little effect on overall benthic macroinvertebrate densities or taxonomic composition (electroﬁshing: elliott & bagenal 1972; bisson 1976; rotenone: dudgeon & assemblage kong 1990). for example, dudgeon & kong (1990) reported that rotenone, a commonly used piscicide, induced an ‘‘immediate catastrophic’’ in- crease in total macroinvertebrate drift densities in two new guinean streams. however, dudgeon & kong (1990) also found that rotenone applications failed to produce signiﬁcant declines in benthic macroinvertebrate density despite increased drift rates (dudgeon & kong 1990). similarly, investi- gators have reported that increased drift rates as- sociated with electroﬁshing activities represent an extremely low percentage of the macroinvertebrat- es comprising the benthos (elliott & bagenal 1972). although snorkeling did not appear to affect the distribution of the total benthic community, snor- keling may have had a signiﬁcant effect on the dis- tribution of early instar mayﬂies, especially at the patch scale. despite a generally weak response of most macroinvertebrate taxa to snorkeling, we esti- mated that nearly 5% of ephemeropterans in the benthos entered the drift in response to snorkeling activities. this is a particularly interesting result given that small mayﬂies had a high propensity to drift even under undisturbed conditions. it is likely that mayﬂies, which are strong swimmers (kohler 1985), respond to local perturbations by actively entering the drift in an effort to disperse from the disturbed area (poff et al. 1991). in contrast, taxa that are less effective swimmers (e.g., coleoptera and trichoptera) may respond to disturbance by burrowing deeper into the substratum. conse- quently, snorkeling may have produced signiﬁcant changes in the patch-speciﬁc distributions of small mayﬂies within a reach, given that a relatively large number of individuals entered the drift and then resettled into other areas of the disturbed reach. direct underwater observation has been con- sidered a versatile and relatively unbiased method for quantifying a variety of biological character- istics of stream ﬁshes (dolloff et al. 1996). snor- keling techniques have been used successfully in studies ranging from large scale population and community surveys (hankin & reeves 1988; ensign et al. 1995) to specialized observations of habitat use and foraging behavior (petty & grossman 1996; grossman et al. 1998). to our knowledge, however, there are no published studies that have examined the potential indirect effects of snorkeling on the foraging behaviors of stream ﬁshes. our results allow us to draw at least two con- clusions regarding the potential impacts of snor- keling on ﬁshes in shope fork. first, because such a small percentage of benthic macroinvertebrates drift completely out of snorkeled reaches, snor- keling should have a minimal impact on the behav- ior and distribution of stream ﬁshes at the reach snorkeling effects in streams scale. second, the effects of snorkeling on ﬁsh be- havior at the patch scale probably will depend on the degree to which a particular species depends on small mayﬂies as a food resource. because a relatively large number of small mayﬂies enter the drift, repeated snorkeling over a short time span might affect the short-term distribution of this taxon within a reach. fishes that are generalist fee- ders such as mottled sculpin and other benthic ﬁshes, however, may not be affected by changes in the distribution of any one particular prey taxon. in contrast, ﬁshes that specialize on certain taxa or size classes may be indirectly affected by snor- keling if disturbance alters the distribution of their preferred prey. our study suggests that snorkeling during day- light hours in shope fork does not have a signiﬁ- cant effect on the distribution of benthic macroin- vertebrates at either the reach or the patch scale. we conducted this study during the day to coincide with the observation schedules used by many in- vestigators who study ﬁshes in streams (paine et al.1982; petty & grossman 1996; grossman et al. 1998). because macroinvertebrate drift rates follow a diel periodicity (waters 1962; allan 1978), how- ever, our results are applicable to daylight hours only. it is possible that snorkeling has a much greater effect on the benthos at night. previous studies have shown that many macroinvertebrates drift further at night than during the day (elliott 1971; malmqvist & sjo¨stro¨m 1987). therefore, even if the same number of macroinvertebrates en- ter the drift at night, more will ultimately drift out of disturbed reaches leading to a greater effect of snorkeling at the reach scale. furthermore, many macroinvertebrates have an increased tendency to drift at night. this is especially true for larger or- ganisms that do not drift during the day to avoid predation by drift feeding ﬁshes (allan 1978). consequently, because snorkeling increases the drift rates of taxa and size classes with a high pro- pensity to drift, snorkeling effects may be intensi- ﬁed at night possibly leading to a greater effect at both the reach and the patch scales. resumen 1. en un rı´o de los apalaches (carolina del norte, usa) hemos estudiado el efecto del buceo, te´cnica de observacio´n de peces usada de forma habitual, sobre la distribucio´n y abundancia de los macroinvertebrados bento´nicos, a dos escalas distintas: mesoha´bitat (tramos de rı´o de 10 m) y microha´bitat (a´reas (cid:176)1 m usadas por un individuo). en el mesoha´bitat cuantiﬁcamos el aumento en las tasas de macroinvertebrados que derivan aso- ciado al buceo y utilizamos estos valores para calcular el por- centaje de macrobentos que derivo´ fuera de las localidades de buceo. 2. para comprobar los efectos del buceo en el uso del microha´- bitat, utilizamos un modelo de desaparicio´n de macroinverte- 151 vertebrates in a lake district stream. oecologia 6: 191–220. elliott, j.m. & bagenal, t.b. 1972. the effects of electroﬁshing on the macroinvertebrates of a lake district stream. oecolo- gia 9: 1–11. ensign, w.e., angermeier, p.l. & dolloff, c.a. 1995. use of line transect methods to estimate abundance of benthic stream ﬁshes. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 52: 213–222. grossman, g.d., ratajczak, r.e. jr., crawford, m. & free- man, m.c. 1998. assemblage organization in stream ﬁshes: effects of environmental variation and interspeciﬁc interac- tions. ecological monographs 68: 395–420. hankin, d.j., & reeves, g.h. 1988. estimating total ﬁsh abun- dance and total habitat area in small streams based on visual estimation methods. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 45: 834–844. heggenes, j., brabrand, a. & saltveit, s.j. 1990. comparison of three methods for studies of stream habitat use by young brown_trout and atlantic salmon. transactions of the ameri- can fisheries society 119: 101–111. kohler, s.l. 1985. identiﬁcation of stream drift mechanisms: an experimental and observational approach. ecology 66: 1749– 1761. malmqvist, b., & sjo¨stro¨m, p. 1987. stream drift as a conse- quence of disturbance by macroinvertebrate predators. oeco- logia 74: 396–403. mclay, c.l. 1970. a theory concerning the distance travelled by animals entering the drift of a stream. journal of the fish- eries research board of canada 27: 359–370. moyle, p.b. & baltz, d.m. 1985. microhabitat use by an assem- blage of california stream ﬁshes: developing criteria for in- stream ﬂow determinations. transactions of the american fisheries society 114: 695–704. murphy, b.r. & willis, d.w. eds. 1996. fisheries techniques. 2nd edn. bethesda, maryland: american fisheries society. paine, m.d., dodson, j.j. & power, g. 1982. habitat and food resource partitioning among four species of darters (perci- dae: etheostoma) in a southern ontario stream. canadian journal of zoology 60: 1635–1641. petty, j.t. 1998. mottled sculpin in a dynamic landscape: linking environmental heterogeneity, individual behaviors, and population regulation in a southern appalachian stream. phd dissertation. athens: university of georgia. petty, j.t. & grossman, g.d. 1996. patch selection by mottled sculpin (pisces: cottidae) in a southern appalachian stream. freshwater biology 35: 261–276. poff, n.l., decino, r.d. & ward, j.v. 1991. size-dependent drift responses of mayﬂies to experimental hydrologic vari- ation: active predator avoidance or passive hydrodynamic displacement? oecologia 88: 577–586. rinco´n, p.a. & lobo´n-cervia´, j. 1993. microhabitat use by stream-resident brown_trout: bioenergetic consequences. transactions of the american fisheries society 122: 575–587. stouder, d.j. 1990. dietary ﬂuctuation in stream ﬁshes and the effects of benthic species interactions. phd dissertation. athens: university of georgia. waters, t.f. 1962. diurnal periodicity in the drift of stream macroinvertebrates. ecology 43: 316–320. petty & grossman brados. para estimar el nu´mero total de macroinvertebrados bento´nicos que derivaron como respuesta a las molestias provo- cadas por el observador, dicho modelo incorporo´ clases de ta- man˜o de macroinvertebrados y comprobamos que el buceo pro- dujo un aumento signiﬁcativo en el nu´mero de macroinverte- brados de deriva. sin embargo, estos aumentos afectaron a un procentaje muy pequen˜o ((cid:176)1%) del nu´mero total de organis- mos bento´nicos, lo que indica que, con toda probabilidad, la observacio´n subacua´tica no afecta a los ensamblajes de ma- croinvertebrados en ninguna de las dos escalas estudiadas, aun- que sı´ inﬂuyo´ de manera desproporcionada sobre los efemero´p- teros (4–5% derivaron como respuesta al buceo) en compara- cio´n con otros taxones. 3. en conclusio´n, el buceo tendrı´a un efecto mı´nimo sobre el comportamiento y la distribucio´n de las mayorı´a de las comuni- dades de peces de agua dulce en meso y microha´bitat, si bien, dado que esta te´cnica afecta de manera sustancial la deriva de efemero´pteros, tambie´n inﬂuira´ sobre el comportamiento de los peces que tienen en estos pequen˜os insectos su fuente principal de alimento. acknowledgments we thank christina clifton for her help in collecting and pro- cessing macroinvertebrate samples. we also thank bruce walla- ce for his original concern over the effects of snorkeling on benthic macroinvertebrates and wayne swank and the staff of the coweeta hydrologic laboratory for providing help with all aspects of our research. our families provided a constant source of support. earlier versions of this manuscript were greatly im- proved by reviews from mary freeman and cecil jennings. por- tions of this research were funded by usda forest service mcintire-stennis program (geo-0047-ms), national science foundation (bsr-9011661) and the warnell school of forest resources. references allan, j.d. 1978. trout predation and the size composition of stream drift. limnology and oceanography 23: 1231–1237. allan, j.d. & feifarek, b.p. 1989. distances traveled by drifting mayﬂy nymphs: factors inﬂuencing return to the substratum. journal of the north american benthological society 8: 322– 330. bisson, p.a. 1976. increased macroinvertebrate drift in an ex- perimental stream caused by electroﬁshing. journal of the fisheries research board of canada 33: 1806–1808. dolloff, a., kershner j. & thurow r. 1996. underwater obser- vation. in: murphy, b.r. & willis, d.w. eds. fisheries tech- niques. 2nd edn. bethesda, maryland: american fisheries society, pages 533–554. dudgeon, d., & kong, h. 1990. benthic community structure and the effect of rotenone piscicide on macroinvertebrate drift and standing stocks in two papua new guinea streams. archiv fu¨r hydrobiologie 119: 35–53. elliott, j.m. 1971. the distances traveled by drifting macroin- 152  