ecology of freshwater fish 2007: 16: 465–467 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved ó 2007 the authors journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish editorial where we are, where we are going… the second ‘ecology of stream fish (esf-ii)’ meeting was held in leon (spain) on 12–16 june 2006. the meeting attracted several hundred participants and 72 papers were presented ranging from invasive species, to biodiversity regulation, to life history evolution in small populations. the ﬁrst esf, undertaken in 1998 in luarca (spain), was held in recognition of the tremendous progress in stream ﬁsh ecology made since 1985, when the seminal community and evo- lutionary ecology of north american stream fishes symposium was hosted by the american society of ichthyologists and herpetologists (matthews & heins 1987). a similar logic served as the underpinnings for the esf-ii meeting; acknowledgement that the ﬁeld of stream ﬁsh ecology has progressed and perhaps shifted course slightly, in the ensuing 8 years since esf-i. in this introduction, we will describe the similarities and differences in the two meetings and present our own, perhaps idiosyncratic views, regarding progress in the ﬁeld of stream ﬁsh ecology as reﬂected in the contributions of the second esf meeting. as with any active ﬁeld, foci of interest can change quickly and we see evidence of that in stream ﬁsh ecology. although there are similarities in the topical organisation of the two meetings there are differences as well, representing shifts in both basic and applied ecology. esf-i was organised into six sections: (i) landscape approaches to stream ﬁsh ecology, (ii) life history evolution, (iii) stream management, conserva- tion and endangered species, (iv) ecological genetics, (v) mechanistic aspects of habitat selection and (6) behavioural ecology. contributions to sections ranged from 4 to 11 presentations, and it was recognised that there was substantial overlap among sections (rinco´n et al. 2000). esf-ii contained the following ﬁve sections: (i) regulatory processes in populations and assemblages, (ii) landscape approaches to stream ﬁsh ecology, (iii) the importance of genetics and behaviour in ecology, (iv) ecological approaches to the conser- vation and management of stream ﬁshes, with rele- vance to endangered species and ﬁnally, (v) life history tactics. curiously, both more and a much broader range of papers were published in ‘ecology of freshwater fish’ from esf-i and we are unsure why this has occurred. this is particularly puzzling, because 20 more papers were presented in esf-ii than in esf-i (72 vs. 52). certainly, new journals have proliferated in the past 10 years, but they probably are not enough to explain such a difference. it also is true that submission rates for ‘ecology of freshwater fish’ have increased substantially during this period with a concomitant increase in rejection rates. what differences do we see when examining the papers in this issue of ‘ecology of freshwater fish’ as opposed to the papers from esf-i meeting? clearly, global climate change and invasive species have come to play a much more prominent role in stream ﬁsh ecology than they had previously. given the energetic cost of living in a running water habitat, it is likely that the distributions of stenothermal stream ﬁshes will contract, and those of eurythermal ﬁshes expand, as global climate change progresses. salmonids in the iberian peninsula and cottus in southern europe are good examples of species whose southern ranges will probably contract because of global climate change. at the same time, is likely that cyprinids such as squalius, barbus and chondrostoma will expand their ranges into the upper portions of rivers and more northern climates. although we can hope for reversal of anthropogenic climate warming, it is likely that we should take advantage of this situation scientiﬁcally, and view this process as a potential natural experi- ment. consequently, we may have an opportunity to gather preimpact data now, before distributional changes occur, and then be in a better position to evaluate the biological impacts on species loss ⁄ addi- tion as ranges contract and expand. such changes will not only occur in distribution (wolter 2007), but will certainly affect the life history traits of these species as described by some contributors to the meeting (pont et al. 2006; gorta´zar et al. 2007). it the remaining differences between the two meet- ings involve scientiﬁc advances in science that have produced shifts in the interests of stream ﬁsh ecolo- gists, coupled with a more general acceptance of hypotheses that were still somewhat controversial in the 1990s. for example, most stream ﬁsh ecologists seem to be shifted away from the competitionist school of thought so common in the 1970s and 1980s, and now recognise that environmental variability in the form of ﬂow and temperature variations, can depress ﬁsh populations below levels at which doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2007.00285.x 465 grossman & lobo´n-cervia´ resource limitations are important. that is not to say that stream ﬁsh ecologists dismiss resource limitation and its spouse, interspeciﬁc competition, out of hand, but rather we now recognise that these mechanisms require rigorous testing before being applied to a given stream ﬁsh assemblage. in fact, we seem to be rediscovering mechanistic approaches of ﬁsh ecolo- gists of the 1950s and 1960s such as f. e. j. fry, who proposed that the niche could be quantiﬁed on the basis of performance under varying physical regimes as early as the 1940s (fry 1947). this plurality of approaches is good, and will help us untangle the processes of organising ﬁsh assemblages in streams, even if we only learn that many streams are different! the published contributions also denote a shift from more descriptive studies, especially those involving assemblage dynamics to more synthetic population- based studies that frequently combine a variety of research approaches to test mechanisms of population regulation (wootton 2007). identiﬁcation of such mechanisms, although common in the stream salmo- nid literature, has now become a subject of study in nonsalmonids, and will greatly increase our under- standing of how environmental variation and resource limitation affect speciﬁc populations. in addition, investigators are now focusing on factors affecting young-of-the-year (yoy) dynamics of stream ﬁshes (reichard & jurajda 2007), a subject that has long been neglected because of the logistical difﬁculties of quantifying yoy in running water environments. nonetheless, changes in year class strength have been shown to strongly affect population size in marine ﬁsh populations, and studies of yoy dynamics will probably aid our understanding of population ﬂuctu- ations and concomitant changes in assemblage struc- ture in stream ﬁshes. branching out yet further, we see that substantial progress has been made in both genetic analyses and invasion biology and this progress is reﬂected in the contributions to esf-ii (cowley et al. 2007; juanes et al. 2007; mcphee et al. 2007; ribeiro et al. 2007). in the former case, it is now clear that what previously appeared to be homogeneous populations of species are actually subdivided into discrete units by either genetics or behaviour (or by both processes) and cannot be managed as a single demographic unit (mcphee et al. 2007). with respect to migratory salmonids the picture is quite confusing and probably involves multiple causes including the two aforemen- tioned traits combined with morphological responses to differing natal environments (carrier et al. 2006; mcphee et al. 2007). several investigators have now documented the importance of precocial males to population viability of migratory salmonids, especially when population size is small (juanes et al. 2007), whereas others have shown that microhabitat hetero- 466 geneity is necessary to ensure that such matings occur (grimardias et al. 2006). in addition, the use of stable isotope analysis holds great promise in identifying subcomponents of a population, especially when resident and migratory subcomponents are both pres- ent (kristensen et al. 2006). such studies document the complexity of biological processes displayed by stream ﬁshes, and make our research efforts both more difﬁcult and more interesting. the study of invasive species also has come to prominence in the intervening years, as we move towards a global economy with greatly increased international commerce. recognition that invasives may have negative impacts on native ﬁshes has been long in coming, especially given the role that ﬁsheries agencies have had in introducing predatory sport ﬁsh such as salmonids and centrar- chids. added to the contribution by aquarists to the establishment of invasives, southern europe is now host to a variety of invasive cyprinids, cichlids and centrarchids (almeida et al. 2007; ribeiro et al. 2007). apparently invasives tend to be most abundant in disturbed habitats (cowley et al. 2007; ribeiro et al. 2007) although even in these habitats they may come into contact with native species where their effects via many mechanisms including competition, predation and disease introduction, warrant further study given the imperative to preserve our native faunas. one of the more exciting areas of applied ﬁsh ecology involves the design of reserves or protected areas that can serve not only as refuges, but also as source habitats for a broader landscape (cucherousset et al. 2007). the general techniques of conservation biology dealing with the importance of reserves and reserve design have received little attention in fresh- water ecology, and hopefully this will change. finally, the esf-ii meeting contained a number of oral contributions dealing with advanced statistical techniques such as artiﬁcial neural networks and individual-based modelling (labonne & hendry 2006; lasne et al. 2006), which is a welcome trend in stream ﬁsh ecology. other methods, such bayesian analysis and hierarchical modelling will certainly prove useful in ascertaining habitat requirements and distributional patterns of stream ﬁshes. there were several similarities in the papers from the two meetings, including attempts to characterise the dynamics of stream ﬁsh assemblages especially with respect to effects of both local and regional landscape factors (hugueny & tadesco 2006; gian- nico et al. 2006; ferreira et al. 2007). in addition, stream ﬁsh ecologists continue to study both micro- habitat use and movements of stream ﬁshes, with the goal of delineating both population and assemblage level spatial boundaries and quantifying critical habitats. it may be some time before we come to a consensus on topics such as the restricted movement paradigm, especially because stream ﬁsh populations seem to display a variety of movement patterns. it is likely that microhabitat studies will be more successful from both a predictive and a critical habitat perspec- tive, if they include some aspect of ﬁtness such as energetic cost or gain. rapid progress continues to be made in the ﬁeld of stream ﬁsh ecology and the organisers hope that this volume helps ﬁll the informational needs of both basic and applied ﬁsh ecologists. g. d. grossman1, j. lobo´ n-cervia´ 2 1warnell school of forestry & natural resources. university of georgia, athens, ga, usa, 2national museum of natural sciences (csic) c ⁄ jose´ gutie´ rrez abascal, madrid, spain acknowledgements the organisational skills of gustavo ‘gus’ gonza´lez, eva a´ lvarez, david pe´rez, david mı´gue´lez and our translator ms maite lavandeira were the essentials of this meeting. warm thanks are due to the staff of the universidad de leo´ n and particularly to jose´ carlos pena (school of biological sci- ences), and to the diputacio´ n y ayuntamiento de leo´ n and consejeria de medio ambiente de castilla y leo´n for all their help and support. references almeida, d., nicola, g.g., almodo´ var, a. & elvira, b. 2007. spread of exotic largemouth bass microterus risk of salmoides & pumpkinseed lepomis gibbosus in park, caban˜ero nacional. an approach from trophic ecology. ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. carrier, a., dodson, j. & guderley, h. 2006. the inﬂuence of water velocity in the determination of anadromy or residency in brook charr (salvelinus_fontinalis). ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. cowley, d., wissmar, r. & sallenave, r. 2007. fish assem- blages and seasonal movements of ﬁsh in irrigation canals and river reaches of the middle rio grande, new mexico (usa). ecology of freshwater fish 16: 548–558. cucherousset, j., paillisson, j.-m., carpentier, a., thoby, v., damien, j.-p., eybert, m.-c., feunteun, e. & robinet, t. 2007. freshwater protected areas: an effective measure to reconcile conservation and exploitation of the threatened european eels (anguilla anguilla)? ecology of freshwater fish 16: 528–538. ferreira, m., sousa, l., santos, j., reino, l., oliveira, j., almeida, p. & cortes, r. 2007. regional and local environ- mental correlates of native iberian ﬁsh fauna. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 504–514. fry, f. 1947. effect of the environment on animal activity. university of toronto studies, biological series, no. 54, publications of ontario fisheries research laboratory, no. 68. toronto, canada. where we are, where we are going… giannico, g., boxall, g. & li, h. 2006. can topography be used to predict lahontan cutthroat trout distribution in headwater stream reaches. ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. gorta´zar, j., garcia de jalon, d.l., alonso-gonzales, c., vizca- ino, p., baeza, d. & marchamalo, m. 2007. spawning period of a southern brown_trout population in a highly unpredictable stream. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 515–527. grimardias, d., chebaud, j., merchermek, n. & beall, e. 2006. the importance of habitat diversity on the reproductive success of precociously mature male parr of atlantic salmon. ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. hugueny, b. & tadesco, p. 2006. landscape ﬁlters and species traits: a test of life-history theory for west african river ﬁshes. ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. juanes, f., perez, j. & garcia-vazquez, e. 2007. reproductive strategies in small populations: using atlantic salmon as a case study. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 468–475. kristensen, e., closs, g. & kim, j. 2006. estimating the reproductive contribution of sympatric resident and migratory brown_trout (salmo_trutta) on a longitudinal scale in small spawning tributaries: effects on population dynamics. ecol- ogy of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. labonne, j. & hendry, a. 2006. interactions between gene ﬂow and adaptive divergence in populations of guppies (poecilia reticulata): an individual based modeling approach. ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. lasne, e., lek, s. & laffaille, p. 2006. hierarchical manage- ment of ﬂoodplain ﬁsh biodiversity: species-based approach. ecology of stream fish ii, abstract. leon, spain. matthews, w. & heins, d. 1987. community and evolutionary ecology of north american stream ﬁshes. norman, ok: university oklahoma press. a mcphee, m., utter, f., stanford, j., kuzishchin, k., savvaitova, k., pavlov, d. & allendorf, f. 2007. population structure and partial anadromy in oncorhynchus_mykiss from kamchatka: relevance for conservation strategies around the paciﬁc rim. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 539–547. pont, d., abdoli, a., sagnes, p., reyjol, y., crane, r. & hugueny, b. 2006. global warming, geographical distribu- tion and life history strategy of the bullhead (cottos, gobio). ecology of stream fish ii, leon, spain. reichard, m. & jurajda, p. 2007. seasonal dynamics and age structure of drifting cyprinid ﬁshes: an interspeciﬁc compar- ison. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 482–492. ribeiro, f., orjuela, r., megalhaes, m. & collares-pereira, m. 2007. variability in feeding ecology of a south american cichlid: a reason for successful invasion in mediterranean- type rivers? ecology of freshwater fish 16: 559–569. rinco´ n, p.a., hughes, n.f. & grossman, g.d. 2000. land- scape approaches to stream ﬁsh ecology, mechanistic aspects of habitat selection and behavioral ecology. introduction and commentary. ecology of freshwater fish 9: 1–3. wolter, ch. 2007. temperature inﬂuence on the ﬁsh assemblage structure in a large lowland river, the lower oder river, germany. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 493–503. wootton, r.j. 2007. over-wintering growth and losses in a small population of the threespine stickleback, gasterosteus aculeatus (l.), in mid-wales. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 476–481. 467  