ecology of freshwater fish 2012: 21: 34–41 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2011 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish gross colour pattern is used to distinguish between opponents during aggressive encounters in a lake malawi cichlid michael j. pauers1, joshua m. kapfer2, kirsten doehler3, j. todd lee4, craig s. berg5 1milwaukee public museum, section of vertebrate zoology, milwaukee, wi, usa 2departments of environmental studies and biology, campus box 2015, elon university, elon, nc, usa 3department of mathematics and statistics, elon university, elon, nc, usa 4department of mathematics and statistics, elon university, elon, nc, usa 5milwaukee county zoological gardens, milwaukee, wi, usa accepted for publication june 13, 2011 abstract – the role of male colouration in the behavioural interactions of haplochromine cichlids has received much attention. previous studies supported the role played by visual signals during interactions of rock-dwelling cichlids, or mbuna, from lake malawi. it has largely been assumed that hue, and not pattern, is the primary signal encoded in male colouration; thus, the role of colour pattern has received less attention. we explored the use of visual signals during aggression in labeotropheus fuelleborni by using identically and differently coloured opponents and by offering these opponents under coloured illumination. we presented two simultaneous opponents to males and found that the focal male’s responses depended upon opponent colour pattern; similarly patterned opponents received more aggression, even if presented under a hue-obscuring light source. these results support ﬁndings that gross colour pattern may be more important than hue in interactions among the mbuna and further support an important role for visual communication in these ﬁshes. key words: haplochromine; cichlid; behaviour; labeotropheus fuelleborni; sexual selection; male–male aggression introduction in early studies of animal behaviour, ethologists usually considered animal colour patterns as an integrated whole, especially in terms of the changes that occur in colour patterns both contextually and ontogenetically (e.g., baerends & baerends-van roon 1950); however, animal colouration can be considered to consist of at least two distinct components. first, there is the overall arrangement, size and shape of individual colour elements present on the external surface of the animal; this can be thought of as the gross colour pattern. secondly, there is information about including chroma, brightness and especially hue (endler 1978, 1990). if animal colour patterns include these two components, then most early ethological studies of the individual colours themselves, animal colouration focussed on gross colour pattern. on the other hand, many recent studies of the role of colouration in animal behaviour, especially with the advent of affordable, portable spectrophotometers capable of providing objective, unbiased data about reﬂected wavelengths of light, tend to be concerned with colour in and of itself (e.g., gray et al. 2008; maan & cummings 2008). a favourite group of organisms for the study of the interplay between colouration and behaviour is the haplochromine cichlids of the african great lakes, and the evolution of male nuptial colouration has been an especially popular research topic. while female mate choice for male colouration, and the concomitant effects on speciation, has received the bulk of this attention (e.g., jordan et al. 2003; pauers et al. 2004; seehausen et al. 2008), there has been a recent surge correspondence: m. j. pauers, milwaukee public museum, section of vertebrate zoology, 800 w. wells street, milwaukee, wi, usa. e-mail: mjpauers@gmail.com 34 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2011.00520.x in interest regarding the role of nuptial colouration in modulating male intrasexual interactions (dijkstra et al. 2005, 2006, 2009; korzan & fernald 2006). interestingly, some of these investigations suggest a possible role for aggressive biases towards similarly coloured and patterned males in speciation (seehausen & schluter 2004; pauers et al. 2008; dijkstra et al. 2009). this research suggests that because males do not tolerate males of similar colour and pattern in their territories, regardless of species, but are less aggres- sive towards differently coloured individuals, male– male aggression serves as a force promoting the diversiﬁcation of differently coloured and thus repro- ductively isolated species. most of this research has generally emphasised the role of hue, either explicitly stating or implicitly assuming that haplochromines recognise individuals via the colours present on their bodies, and not necessarily the overall pattern of which these colours are just a part (e.g., seehausen et al. 2008; dijkstra et al. 2009). for example, in the case of female mate choice for male nuptial colouration, a relationship has been found in lake victorian haplochromines (pun- damilia spp.) between the amount of red in the males’ colour pattern and female choice (seehausen et al. the transmission of long-wave- 2008). in addition, length light, especially red wavelengths, through various habitats, and two measures of female sensi- tivity to red wavelengths have been recorded in these ﬁsh (seehausen et al. 2008). yet, hue is only one aspect of colour and, analysed individually, does not account for gross colour pattern (endler 1978, 1990). the presence, size, shape and distribution of colour patches across the body, as well as the contrast among them, are all equally important characteristics of colour patterns, reﬂective of the many different needs a colour pattern serves (endler 1978). moreover, a recent study of assortative mating in lake malawi cichlids suggests that it is gross colour pattern, and not hue, that is important in female choice (blais et al. 2009). as such, the role of gross colour pattern in mediating behavioural interactions among haplochromines from lake malawi should be further investigated. one recent study of aggression in lake malawi haplochromines demonstrated that gross male colour pattern, regardless of species or hue, could be a good predictor of the amount and intensity of aggressive interactions. focal male metriaclima mbenjii were more aggressive, and performed more intimidating displays, towards opponents that shared a similar colour pattern, whether or not they were the same species (pauers et al. 2008). however, this study did not distinguish between whether male ﬁsh directed their aggression because of overall colour pattern or because of speciﬁc hues within that colour pattern. to colour pattern-based aggression in mbuna assess whether male aggression is based on gross colour pattern or hue in the mbuna, we performed a study similar to that of pauers et al. (2008) in another lake malawi rock-dwelling species, labeotropheus fuelleborni. to accomplish this, we conducted several experiments that investigated differently coloured individuals of the same species, and altered lighting conditions, to evaluate whether hue or gross colour pattern is more important in modulating aggressive interactions in the mbuna. based on the ﬁndings of pauers et al. (2008) and dijkstra et al. (2009), we predicted that males would react more aggressively towards individuals with similar hue, rather than gross colour pattern, and that if experimental light was used to mask hue, ﬁsh would not be able to select a similarly hued individual towards which it would direct a greater proportion of aggression. methods experimental animals f. ‘ob’ the subjects of this study were 10 wild-caught adult male labeotropheus fuelleborni from katale island, located off of the western shore in the northern portion of lake malawi. this species features a prominent orange patch on the lower ﬂank, which underlies a blue dorsum and bluish-white dorsal ﬁn. we examined the aggressive behaviour of l. c. fuelleborni ‘katale’ in response to opponents with different colour patterns that were presented to focal individuals in particular combinations. three types of opponents were used: l. fuelleborni (n = 5; orange- blotched pattern, comprised of small orange and black blotches spread randomly across the body, from the milwaukee county zoo’s collection), l. fuelleborni ‘chidunga’ (n = 5; solid blue body with a red dorsal ﬁn; ‘rt’ colouration, also from the milwaukee county zoo’s collection) or an l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale.’ owing to limited number of ﬁsh, all l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale’ served as both focal and stimulus ﬁsh in experiments; the order in which they did was haphazard (dijkstra et al. 2006; pauers et al. 2008). further, while the focal males were used a total of four times throughout the experiments, each time a focal male was used, it faced a different pair of opponents, thus making each encounter a novel experience for the male, and thereby eliminated pseudoreplication (sensu pauers et al. 2004). the l. fuelleborni ‘chidunga’, hereafter referred to as ‘rt’, are a natural population, found in the south-western portion of lake malawi, while the ‘ob’ subjects, although rare in nature, are found in many populations throughout the lake, including the katale region (a. konings, pers. comm.). all ﬁsh used in experiments were roughly the same size (within 3 cm standard length). 35 ers were watertight and provided only visual contact between subjects; olfactory signals were eliminated by these containers, and auditory cues were diminished, if not eliminated. further, this apparatus allowed the focal ﬁsh to interact with the opponent, but eliminated aggression-related injuries. light-emitting diode (led) a single focal male was placed in the arena and allowed to acclimate for 4–24 h prior to observation. after the acclimation period, a focal male was presented with two opponents of roughly the same size as the focal ﬁsh, which we placed individually into the two suspended aquaria. after the opponents were introduced, we activated the appropriate exper- imental light sources. these light sources, which were custom-built sources, rested on clear plexiglas strips placed directly on top of the opponent aquaria and provided the necessary lighting conditions for our experiments. there were two such light sources, each constructed using a small, 9.6 · 7.2 cm circuit board with either 28 (full spec- trum) or 25 (green) individual leds; while the full- spectrum source primarily contained full-spectrum leds (17), we also added some ultraviolet (3), green (4), yellow (1) and red (3) leds to provide a fuller range of wavelengths. opponents were illuminated with one of three possible lighting treatments: green light, full-spectrum light or ﬂuorescent room light (table 1). each light treatment was designed to highlight (i.e., full spectrum) or mask (i.e., green light) the hue of individual opponents, leaving gross colour pattern as the sole colour-related visual cue available from green-lit opponents (fig. 2). the full- spectrum light source also provided a measure of control in that it helped to ensure that any differences in behaviour towards the stimulus ﬁsh were not because of a change in luminance over the green- illuminated opponent. these light sources were equiluminant (full spectrum = 2.195 · w · sr)1 · m)2; green = 2.175 · 101 w · sr)1 · m)2), and their spectra are shown in fig. 3. pauers et al. fish were kept and experiments were conducted at the milwaukee county zoo. the ﬁsh were housed in 38-l aquaria that were divided into half by two perforated but opaque dividers, and each ﬁsh was housed in its own half of an aquarium; such tankmates were never used as opponents. barriers were placed between aquaria to prevent assessments of potential opponents. subjects were fed a mixture of pellet, ﬂake and frozen food twice daily. the aquaria were operated via a ﬂow-through system that exchanged the entire volume of each aquarium 10 times per day; excess food and ﬁsh waste were removed ad libitum with a syphon. fish were allowed to acclimate for approximately 90 days prior to experimentation. experimental procedures experiments were conducted in a 151-l aquarium in which a small rock pile provided territory for the focal male (fig. 1). opponent ﬁsh were housed singly in two smaller aquaria (approximately 10 l, 35 cm · 20 cm · 15 cm), which were suspended in the arena. these containers were situated within the arena such that there was approximately 60 cm between them, and ca. 25 cm from the bottom of the arena, allowing focal males to easily assess opponents. these contain- fig. 1. the experimental arena; 91.4 cm · 45.5 cm · 45.5 cm. a, top view; b, side view. 1, left stimulus chamber; 2, right stimulus chamber; 3, left light support; 4, right light support; 5, left stimulus lighting; 6, right stimulus lighting. the behavioural interactions were videotaped for 10 min with no humans present. after experimenta- tion, all subjects were returned to their respective holding tanks. both focal and opponent males were used no more frequently than once every three trials, giving each male at least 3 days of recovery among trials. aggressive behaviour was scored from the table 1. opponent types, lighting conditions and predicted recipient of greatest aggression from focal ‘katale’ males for each treatment. experiment opponent 1 opponent 1 lighting opponent 2 opponent 2 lighting prediction katale katale katale katale ambient room green green green ob ob rt katale ambient room full spectrum full spectrum full spectrum katale no difference no difference full-spectrum katale experiment 1 experiment 2 experiment 3 experiment 4 36 colour pattern-based aggression in mbuna fig. 2. the effect of experimental lighting conditions on the colour pattern of l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale.’ a, full-spectrum light- ing; b, monochromatic green. the same male appears in each photograph; it is an anaesthetised individual photographed out of water. while this ﬁgure is largely demonstrative for human visualisation, l. c.f. fuelleborni should be able to perceive all in both 2a and b (carleton & kocher 2001). the hues present fig. 3. spectra of the equiluminant light sources used in this experiment. solid line = monochromatic green source; dashed line = full spectrum. videotapes by mjp, jmk and csb, and the number of behaviours recorded by each observer for each trial was averaged (pauers et al. 2008). we counted the number of three individual aggressive behaviours performed by the focal male towards each of the stimulus males during a 10-min trial. these included the number of lateral displays, frontal displays, and butting or biting; further, we used the sum of all of these behaviours (‘total aggression’) as a measure of the total amount of aggressive behaviours directed towards each opponent (baerends & baerends-van roon 1950; pauers et al. 2008). a subsequent analysis of the reviewers’ data demonstrated that none of the three reviewers of the videos tended to observe higher or lower counts of aggressive acts compared with the other two review- ers. in approximately 75% of the trials over the four experiments, all reviewers agreed on whether the difference in either lateral displays or total aggression between the two opponents was positive, negative or zero. for the other 25% of trials, the reviewers all agreed that the difference in counts was at least close to zero. for example, if a reviewer observed a difference of one in a particular trial, the other two reviewers may have observed a difference of zero (k. doehler, unpublished data). we counted only the number of aggressive behav- iours performed by the focal male. while stimulus male behaviour can indeed inﬂuence the behaviour of a focal male (barlow & siri 1994), the stimulus males used in this experiment were typically nonresponsive to the focal male, displaying the behaviours characteristic of a ﬁsh introduced to a novel aquarium; e.g., swimming back and forth along the sides of the enclosure, or sitting motionless at the bottom (pauers, kapfer, and berg, personal observation). thus, as stimulus male behaviour was largely consistent among trials, we are conﬁdent that examining only focal male behaviour gives an accurate picture of focal male aggression. statistical analyses analyses were conducted to address whether differ- ences existed between the levels of aggression directed towards the two opponent types in each of the four experiments; more speciﬁcally, we wanted to deter- mine whether opponent type and lighting conditions impacted the levels of aggression. to answer this, we used the total number of lateral displays directed towards both opponents, as well as the sum of all aggressive acts (‘total aggression’) directed towards the opponents. we chose these two behavioural metrics for two reasons. first, while they are highly correlated with each other (total aggression = butts ⁄ bites + lateral displays + frontal displays), they help deﬁne two different types of aggression. total aggres- sion demonstrates the overall amount of aggressive behaviours directed to an opponent, while the number 37 pauers et al. is presented in room lighting or of lateral displays indicates the amount of a special type of aggression directed towards an opponent the focal male wants to intimidate (e.g., pauers et al. 2008). second, a previous investigation (pauers et al. 2008) demonstrated that these are the most informa- tive behaviours in aggressive encounters in the mbuna. the null hypothesis of our analyses is that there were no signiﬁcant differences between the median measures of aggression across the two treatments within each experiment. also, we expected that the focal ﬁsh would be more likely to display aggressive behaviours to the ‘katale’ opponent when the ‘katale’ opponent full- spectrum lighting; we expected that the green lighting would obscure the ‘katale’ opponents’ hue to the point that the focal ﬁsh would not be able to recognise it as a conspeciﬁc. a summary of our predictions for the recipient of greatest aggression in each experiment is shown in table 1. we predicted that in experiment 1, in which both the ob and katale ﬁsh were under ambient light, the focal male would direct a signiﬁ- cantly greater proportion of aggressive acts towards the ‘katale’ opponent; we predicted the same outcome for experiment 4, in which the focal male would direct the greatest proportion of aggression towards the full- spectrum-lit ‘katale’ opponent. in experiments 2 and 3, we predicted that there would be no signiﬁcant difference in aggression directed towards either of the opponents, one of which was a green-lit ‘katale’ male, the other a l. fuelleborni male with a different gross colour pattern than that of the ‘katale’ population (ob and rt, respectively). in each experiment, paired differences were deﬁned as the number of aggressive acts by the focal ﬁsh towards the ‘katale’ opponent minus the number of aggressive acts by that same focal ﬁsh towards the other opponent. note that in experiment 4, both opponents were katale, and in this case, the difference was deﬁned as the number of aggressive acts towards the green-lit katale minus the aggressive acts towards the katale under full-spectrum light. as stated earlier, both the number of lateral displays and total displays were analysed. owing to a small sample size in each experiment and concerns about the normality of the paired differences, we considered nonparametric alter- natives to t-test procedures. both the wilcoxon signed-rank test and the sign test were conducted on the paired differences for each of the four experiments. the signed-rank test, which takes into account the magnitude of the observed differences, is generally more powerful than the sign test. results the paired differences in lateral displays for each of the four experiments are shown in fig. 4, which has a 38 fig. 4. the difference in lateral displays of aggression for each of the four experiments. the difference has been deﬁned as the number of lateral displays from opponent 1, which is always a katale ﬁsh, minus the number of lateral displays from opponent 2; thus, a positive difference indicates that opponent 1 received a higher number of lateral displays from the focal ﬁsh than opponent 2. vertical reference line at zero. a positive difference indicates that opponent 1 received a higher number of lateral displays from the focal ﬁsh than opponent 2. both experiments 1 (katale & ob, room lighting) and 2 (katale green, ob full spectrum) show a large proportion of differences that are positive. in experiment 3 (katale green, rt full spectrum), there are an approximately equal number of positive and negative differences; and in experiment 4 (katale green, katale full spectrum), there are more negative differences, indicating that the ‘katale’ opponent under full-spectrum illumination received more lateral displays of aggression. figure 5 shows similar results when the paired differences in total aggressive acts are considered. two-sided p-values corresponding to the signed- rank test and the sign test on the differences in lateral displays are given in table 2. in experiment 1, both tests indicate that the median value of the paired differences is signiﬁcantly different from zero at the 0.05 level. we infer from this that the number of lateral displays directed at the katale was signiﬁcantly greater than the number of lateral displays directed at the ob. the signed-rank test on experiment 2 data indicates the paired differences is signiﬁcantly different from zero at the 0.05 level, although the sign test is not signiﬁcant at this level. this strongly suggests that the katale under green light received signiﬁcantly more lateral displays than the ob under full-spectrum light. table 3 shows two-sided p-values corresponding to signed-rank and sign tests on total aggressive acts. both tests are signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level in experiments 1 and 2. the median value of that colour pattern-based aggression in mbuna discussion the results of our experiment indicate that male l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale’ tend to direct more aggression towards opponents with similar colour patterns and do so even when the hues of their opponents are masked. therefore, our original hypotheses and predictions were not supported. these results expand upon a previous study (pauers et al. 2008) and further conﬁrm that male mbuna use the nuptial colour patterns of opponents to identify opponents. the results of our current study, however, present a more reﬁned view of how males use colour pattern cues to determine both the possible threat an opponent presents and the types of aggressive behaviours that should be directed towards a particular opponent. further, our experi- mental arena eliminated or at least reduced nonvisual cues, thus supporting a strong role for visual cues in behavioural interactions of the labeotropheus. we based our predictions about the outcome of our trials (table 1) on the hypothesis that male rock- dwelling haplochromines use hue to modulate their aggression towards differently coloured opponents, as had several previous studies (e.g., dijkstra et al. 2005, 2006). but, in experiment 2, despite illumination from a monochromatic light source designed to obscure its hue, the l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale’ opponent was subjected to more frequent and intense aggressive behaviours by the focal ‘katale’ male. further, in experiment 4, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the number or intensity of aggressive behaviour directed towards either the full-spectrum or green-illuminated ‘katale’ opponents. however, the analysis of the data from experiment 4 was strongly inﬂuenced by an outlying data point. these ﬁndings suggest that hue itself may not be important and that focal ﬁsh might have used some other visual cue to identify opponents. this was supported by experiment 3, when we observed no signiﬁcant difference in aggression directed towards a full-spectrum-lit l. fuelleborni ‘chidunga’, which has a colour pattern very distinct from that of l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale’, and a green-lit l. c. f. fuelleborni ‘katale’. we suggest that, with the orange ﬂank of the ‘katale’ opponent obscured by the green light, the focal male could not distinguish between the overall colour patterns of the two opponents; in experiments 2 and 4, such a distinction could have easily been made based upon the presence of melanin patches found in the ‘ob’ males or the absence of such patches on stimulus katale ﬁsh. these results suggest that focal males use their opponents’ colour patterns, rather than hue, to identify opponents who present the greatest threat to their territories and mating opportunities. the idea that the focal ﬁsh use gross colour pattern and not hue to identify opponents is further bolstered 39 fig. 5. the difference in total aggressive displays for each of the four experiments. the difference has been deﬁned as the number of total displays from opponent 1, which is always a ‘katale’ ﬁsh, minus the number of total displays from opponent 2; thus, a positive difference indicates that opponent 1 received a higher number of total displays from the focal ﬁsh than opponent 2. table 2. p-values associated with two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank and sign tests on the difference in lateral displays of aggression. difference has been deﬁned as the number of lateral displays from opponent 1, which is always a katale ﬁsh, minus the number of lateral displays from opponent 2. the asterisk indicates that test results are signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level. p-value associated with the signed-rank test p-value associated with the sign test experiment 1 experiment 2 experiment 3 experiment 4 0.0195 (*) 0.0156 (*) 0.4922 0.1602 0.0215 (*) 0.0703 0.7539 0.3438 table 3. p-values associated with two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank and sign tests on the difference in total aggressive displays. difference has been deﬁned as the number of total displays from opponent 1, which is always a katale ﬁsh, minus the number of total displays from opponent 2. one asterisk indicates that test results are signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level and two asterisks indicate signiﬁcance at the 0.01 level. p-value associated with the signed-rank test p-value associated with the sign test experiment 1 experiment 2 experiment 3 experiment 4 0.0371 (*) 0.0078 (**) 0.9219 0.1934 0.0215 (*) 0.0391 (*) 1.000 0.3438 this indicates a signiﬁcant difference in the number of aggressive acts between the two opponents within each experiment. in experiments 3 and 4, there were no signiﬁcant differences in either lateral displays or total aggressive behaviours, regardless of opponent type or illumination. pauers et al. by comparing the results of experiments 1 and 2. these treatments offered the same types of oppo- nents, an ‘ob’ and a ‘katale’ male, but in experiment 1, both received room lighting, while in experiment 2, the ob was illuminated by a full-spectrum source, and the katale received green lighting. in both treatments, the focal male directed a greater propor- tion of lateral displays and total aggression towards the ‘katale’ opponent, illumination. thus, it seems that the most likely explanation for this result is that the males use the numbers, shapes and distributions of colour patches across an oppo- nent’s ﬂank to identify the greatest threat towards its ability to gain a territory and, in turn, attract a mate (pauers et al. 2008). regardless of we chose the ‘ob’ males speciﬁcally to give the focal males a clear, colour pattern-based distinction between opponents. while there is great diversity in colour pattern among populations of l. fuelleborni (ribbink et al. 1983; konings 2007), the diversity is typically limited to the presence and position of blue and carotenoid-based colour pattern elements. thus, the ‘ob’ colour pattern, while rare in wild popula- tions, does offer a natural colour pattern variant from the typical blue and ⁄ or carotenoid different combinations and allows us to state with greater certainty that colour pattern, either instead of or along with hue, plays a role in opponent recognition. support for the role of hue in mediating behavioural interactions in the haplochromine cichlids is equivo- cal. while it appears to be of great importance in lake victorian haplochromines in both female choice (seehausen et al. 1997, 2008) and male–male aggres- sion (dijkstra et al. 2005, 2006, 2009), its importance, as well as that of other visual cues, has recently been called into question in the lake malawi rock-dwelling haplochromines (e.g., jordan et al. 2003; plenderleith et al. 2005; blais et al. 2009). the study by blais et al. (2009) is particularly intriguing in this regard, as they demonstrate that when females of the lake malawi genus metriaclima are forced to select mates using only visual signals, assortative mating breaks down. in contrast, when allowed full access to males, even under experimental lighting conditions designed to oblate male nuptial hues, female metriaclima still assortatively mated. the authors conclude that gross colour pattern may be more important than hue for mate choice in these ﬁsh and that nonvisual signals may actually supersede visual signals in terms of their importance in behavioural interactions. nonetheless, it is important to note that couldridge & alexander (2002) found some support for the use of hue in mate choice decisions. two of the species in their study, pseudotropheus lombardoi and m. zebra ‘gold’, have very similar colour patterns and hues (i.e., brown stripes against a yellow ground colour) and engaged in 40 a relatively high amount of heterospeciﬁc courtship with one another. important the equivocality of these previous studies suggests that perhaps hue by itself is not to the malawian mbuna and that hues need to be observed (by mbuna) and considered (by scientists) within the context of a particular colour pattern. the results presented herein certainly support this interpretation and further suggest a role for gross colour pattern in mediating behavioural interactions in haplochromines and, very speciﬁcally, in male–male aggression in the labeotro- pheus. future research projects on species recognition among these ﬁshes should take this into consideration and strive to either carefully manipulate hue (e.g., jordan et al. 2003; blais et al. 2009; this study) or more cautiously consider whether the behaviours observed should be attributed to hue or gross pattern. if it is the case that gross colour pattern, either individually or alongside of hue, is involved in species recognition, our current views of sexual selection and speciation in these ﬁshes will require some reconsideration. acknowledgements we thank c. pelke, m. o’connor and the milwaukee county zoo aquarium and reptile center staff for their assistance; c. fendos, especially, was instrumental in attending to this project. d. reineke (mathematics department, university of wiscon- sin-la crosse, la crosse, wi, usa) provided statistical advice on an earlier draft. j.a. kuchenbecker (department of ophthal- mology, university of washington, seattle, wa, usa) sug- gested the design of, and helped construct, the led light sources. j. freund (carroll university, waukesha, wi, usa) reviewed a draft of this manuscript. this research was approved by and conducted under the auspices of the milwaukee county zoo senior animal staff and adheres to the association for the study of animal behaviour ⁄ animal behaviour society guidelines for the use of animals in research and the legal requirements of the country in which the work was performed. statement of authorship mjp, jmk and csb conceived the overall study and set up the experimental arenas and housing aquaria, and csb supervised the daily care of the animals. mjp and csb performed the experiments. mjp, jmk and csb recorded the data from the trials. kd and jtl performed the statistical analyses and helped compose the methods and results sections of the text. mjp wrote most of the manuscript and coordinated the revisions and proofreading, with signiﬁcant help from jmk and kd, although all authors contributed ideas, text and revisions to the ﬁnal product. references baerends, g.p. & baerends-van roon, j.m. 1950. an introduction to the ethology of cichlid ﬁshes. behaviour (suppl. 1): 1–242. barlow, g.w. & siri, p. 1994. polychromatic midas cichlids respond to dummy opponents: color, contrast, and context. behaviour 130: 77–111. blais, j., plenderleith, m., rico, c., taylor, m.i., seehausen, o., van ooseterhout, c. & turner, g.f. 2009. assortative mating among lake malawi cichlid ﬁsh populations is not simply predictable from male nuptial colour. bmc evolu- tionary biology 9: 53. carleton, k.l. & kocher, t.d. 2001. cone opsin genes of african cichlid ﬁshes: tuning spectral sensitivity by differ- ential gene expression. molecular biology and evolution 18: 1540–1550. couldridge, v.c.k. & alexander, g.j. 2002. colour patterns and species recognition in four closely related species of lake malawi cichlid. behavioral ecology 13: 59–64. dijkstra, p.d., seehausen, o. & groothius, t.g.g. 2005. direct male-male competition can facilitate invasion of new colour types in lake victoria cichlids. behavioural ecology and sociobiology 58: 136–143. dijkstra, p.d., seehausen, o., gricar, b.l.a., maan, m.e. & groothius, t.g.g. 2006. can male-male competition stabilize speciation? a test in lake victoria haplochromine cichlid ﬁsh. behavioural ecology and sociobiology 59: 704–713. dijkstra, p.d., hemelrijk, c.k., seehausen, o. & groothuis, t.g.g. 2009. colour polymorphism reduces intrasexual selection in assemblages of cichlid ﬁsh. behavioural ecology 20: 138–144. endler, j.a. 1978. a predator’s view of animal colour patterns. evolutionary biology 11: 319–364. endler, j.a. 1990. on the measurement and classiﬁcation of colour in studies of animal colour patterns. biological journal of the linnean society 41: 315–352. gray, s.m., dill, l.m., tantu, f.y., loew, e.r. & mckinnon, j.s. 2008. environment contingent sexual selection in a colour polymorphic ﬁsh. proceedings of the royal society b 275: 1785–1791. jordan, r., kellogg, k., juanes, f. & stauffer jr, j.r. 2003. evaluation of female mate choice cues in a group of lake malawi mbuna (cichlidae). copeia 2003: 181–186. colour pattern-based aggression in mbuna konings, a. 2007. malawi cichlids in their natural habitat, 5th edn. el paso, tx, usa: cichlid press. korzan, w.j. & fernald, r.d. 2006. territorial male colour predicts agonistic behaviour of conspeciﬁcs in a colour polymorphic species. behavioural ecology 18: 318–323. maan, m.e. & cummings, m.e. 2008. female preference for aposematic signal components in a polymorphic poison frog. evolution 62: 2334–2345. pauers, m.j., mckinnon, j.s. & ehlinger, t.j. 2004. directional sexual selection on chroma and within-pattern colour contrast in labeotropheus fuelleborni. proceedings of the royal society of london series b 271(suppl. 6): s444–s447. pauers, m.j., kapfer, j.m., fendos, c.e. & berg, c.s. 2008. aggressive coloured males in lake malawi cichlid ﬁshes. biology letters 4: 156–159. similarly biases towards plenderleith, m., van oosterhout, c., robinson, r.r. & turner, g.f. 2005. female preference for conspeciﬁc males based on olfactory cues in a lake malawi cichlid ﬁsh. biology letters 1: 411–414. ribbink, a.j., marsh, a.c., marsh, b. & sharp, b.j. 1983. the zoogeography, ecology and taxonomy of the genus labeotropheus ahl 1927 (pisces: cichlidae) of lake malawi. zoological journal of the linnean society 79: 223–243. seehausen, o. & schluter, d. 2004. male-male competition and nuptial colour displacement as a diversifying force in lake victoria cichlid ﬁshes. proceedings of the royal society of london series b 271: 1345–1353. seehausen, o., van alphen, j.j.m. & witte, f. 1997. cichlid ﬁsh diversity threatened by eutrophication that curbs sexual selection. science 277: 1808–1811. seehausen, o., terai, y., magalhaes, i.s., carleton, k.l., mrosso, h.d.j., miyagi, r., van der sluijs, i., schneider, m.v., maan, m.e., tachida, h., imai, h. & okada, n. 2008. speciation through sensory drive in cichlid ﬁsh. nature 455: 620–627. 41  