ecology of freshwater fish 2004: 13: 294–304 printed in denmark æ all rights reserved copyright ó blackwell munksgaard 2004 ecology of freshwater fish spatial and quantitative patterns of movement in large bull trout (salvelinus_confluentus) from a watershed in north-western british columbia, canada, are due to habitat selection and not differences in life history bahr ma, shrimpton jm. spatial and quantitative patterns of movement in large bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) from a watershed in north- western british columbia, canada, are due to habitat selection and not differences in life history. ecology of freshwater fish 2004: 13: 294–304. ó blackwell munksgaard, 2004 abstract – movement and habitat use by bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) was examined using radio telemetry in the morice river watershed, north-western british columbia, between april 2000 and november 2001. bull trout principally utilised mainstem habitat. throughout the watershed, little movement was observed during the winter months. from june to september, movement increased and was correlated with migration into tributaries. we directly observed spawning bull trout only in tributaries of the morice river and never in the mainstem. many of the ﬁsh (n ¼ 48) migrated to the nearest potential spawning sites, but a few ﬁsh (n ¼ 7) made extensive migrations to other regions of the watershed to spawn. fish that spawned in both years of the study returned to the same spawning location. variation in spatial and movement data, therefore, appears to be linked to availability of suitable habitat and not differences in life history that have been observed in large bull trout. m. a. bahr1,2, j. m. shrimpton1 1biology program, university of northern british columbia, prince george, bc, canada, 2present address: gordon and associates ltd, po box 1085, terrace, bc, canada v8g 4v1 key words: bull trout; radio telemetry; migration; spawning j. mark shrimpton, biology program, university of northern british columbia, 3333 university way, prince george, bc, canada v2n 4z9; e-mail: shrimptm@unbc.ca accepted for publication september 15, 2004 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´s del texto principal de este artı´culo. introduction recolonisation if local extinction, permit temporal and spatial diversity in movements of ﬁsh are thought to stabilise populations in highly variable environments (rieman & mcintyre 1993, 1996). diversity in movements, therefore, can reduce rates of local extinctions should occur, and inﬂuence population genetics and community composition (jackson et al. 2001). additionally, divergence in resource use enables a single species to exploit different habitats and evolve multiple life-history forms (schluter & mcphail 1993). different life-history forms of arctic (salvelinus_alpinus) show differential habitat char use that has been linked to morphological variation 294 and genetic divergence (sku´ lason et al. 1996). it has also been suggested that bull trout (s. conﬂuentus) display multiple life-history forms. migratory and resident bull trout differ in age and size at maturity (fraley & shepard 1989; rieman & mcintyre 1993, 1996; mcphail & baxter 1996). identiﬁcation of these different forms has characteristically been determined by habitat use and patterns of movement. additionally, migratory forms have been distin- (lakes), guished as ﬂuvial and migrate to smaller in contrast to resident forms that do not make large migrations to spawn (fraley & shepard 1989; goetz 1989; rieman & mcintyre 1993, 1996; mcphail & baxter 1996; swanberg 1997; beauchamp & van (rivers) and adﬂuvial tributaries to spawn, for important tassell 2001). identiﬁcation of life-history strategies is conservation and management because these strategies represent diversity in the way ﬁsh have adapted to local habitat conditions life-history (walters & korman deﬁnitions bull a quantitative measure of rate and extent of move- ment. 1999). the trout, however, lack for single large watershed fish that use different areas of a watershed may be part of a metapopulation and this structure is thought to provide a mechanism for spreading risk (rieman & and supporting weaker populations mcintyre 1993; rieman & myers 1997). in this study, our objective was to determine if large bull trout within show differential use of habitat and patterns of movement. the morice river watershed has several features that make it a good location to ﬁnd different life-history forms of migratory bull trout. first, the watershed has a lake at its headwaters with rearing and overwintering potential adﬂuvial ﬁsh. secondly, the morice and nanika are large rivers with suitable rearing, spawning and overwintering habitat for ﬂuvial ﬁsh. finally, the watershed also has many tributary systems that have suitable spawning habitat for both adﬂuvial and ﬂuvial ﬁsh. we radiotagged bull in the morice river watershed north-western british columbia, canada, and tracked their movements for 2 years. spatial by mapping individual bull trout movements within the mainstem and tributaries and determining the extent of move- ment individuals that used habitat areas in geographical proximity to one another. to assign groups of patterns were identiﬁed for a trout in location and timing of habitat use by bull trout materials and methods study location the morice river watershed is located in north- western british columbia, canada, near the town of houston (54°24¢, 126°40¢) (fig. 1). the watershed is 4438 km2 in size, and is the largest tributary of the bulkley river which drains into the skeena river. based on habitat, the morice river comprises three sections. the lower section (56.4 km) has long rifﬂes and glides as well as pools and large woody debris, in contrast to the middle section (19.7 km) that ﬂuctuates in depth and is braided with large debris jams. the upper section (15.8 km) differs from the other two as it consists of deep glides, some pools and has good spawning gravel. morice lake is glacial fed and is located at the morice river. trout spawning habitat has been identiﬁed in bull three large watersheds; nanika, thautil and gosnell (bustard 1999). the nanika river drains into morice lake, is approximately 24.1 km long and has an impassable barrier (kidprice falls) at its headwaters near the outlet of kidprice lake. bull trout must pass through the north-east bay of morice lake to access the nanika river. gosnell creek is 58.1-km long and thautil river is 39.4-km long; however, the lower 23 km serves as a migratory corridor for ﬁsh to access denys creek, the major spawning tributary of the thautil river. the headwaters of transmitter implantation and ﬁsh tracking seventy bull trout were radiotagged between 12 april and 16 august 2000. twenty-three tags were fig. 1. overview map of the morice river watershed. spawning locations of ﬁsh with- in the watershed were determined by most upstream location ﬁsh migrated to during august and september as identiﬁed by radiotracking. ground surveys conﬁrmed some of these locations, but visibility and access limited our ability to verify spawning redds in all locations. dashed lines indicate boundaries for upper morice (um), middle morice (mm) and lower morice (lm). locations of ﬁxed radiotelemetry stations are designated by •. 295 bahr & shrimpton system (n ¼ 9; recovered from ﬁsh that had presumably died in 2000 and were implanted into new bull trout between 30 april and 14 june 2001. bull trout were angled from the upper nanika river (n ¼ 12; eight angler days), morice lake (n ¼ 1; six angler days), tha- util/gosnell seven angler days), (n ¼ 26; eight angler days), lower morice river middle morice river (n ¼ 3; two angler days) and upper morice river (n ¼ 42; 10 angler days). fish were anaesthetised in a 20-l bath containing 45 ppm clove oil (10 ml of 1 part clove oil:10 parts ethanol). fork length (fl), weight, branchiostegal ray number, girth and upper jaw length were determined to utilise the linear discriminant function developed by haas & mcphail (1991) to differentiate bull trout from dolly varden (s. malma). bull trout selected for the study were >400 mm in fork length so that transmitter weight (10 g) was <2% of the animal’s body weight as suggested by winter (1996). the leading right pectoral ﬁn ray was separated from the pectoral ﬁn using a scalpel and clipped as close as possible to its insertion with the body. fin rays were dried and used to determine age. bull trout were implanted with coded micropro- cessor transmitters (lotek mcft series, lotek wireless inc., newmarket, on, canada; 59 mm length, 43 cm whip antenna). transmitters emitted digitally encoded signals every 6 s at 149.360 mhz or 149.400 mhz for a nominal minimum lifetime of 540 days. surgical pro- cedures followed were a modiﬁed version of those outlined by ward & miller (1988) and winter (1996). forty helicopter tracking ﬂights were taken between 14 may 2000 and 5 november 2001. a three-element yagi antenna (lotek) received transmitter signals, a trimble tdc2 gps unit (trimble navigation ltd., sunnyvale, ca, usa) logged positions every second and lotek srx-400 receivers recorded frequencies, codes and transmitter power signals. flights were )1, approximately ﬂown at speeds of 100–160 kmæh 50 m above the ground, and completed in approxi- mately 3 h. movements were monitored more inten- sively during spawning season (every 4–7 days from late august to september) during both years, and were reduced to once per month during winter 2000–2001. receiver and gps times were synchronised prior to each ﬂight and ﬁsh locations were assigned at the time of the strongest signal. tracking efﬁciency was estimated using the method of burrows et al. (2001) who used the strongest signal detection (1 s away from )1) and the weakest (10 s away the ﬁsh at 100 kmæh )1) to estimate the accuracy from the ﬁsh at 160 kmæh of ﬁsh locations. when including gps error (±20 m), accuracy ranged from ±50–475 m for locations of bull trout therefore a margin of error of ±475 m was used for interpreting movement data. in the morice river watershed, 296 movement of ﬁsh was also monitored by ﬁxed stations. one ﬁxed station was located near the conﬂuence of the morice and bulkley rivers to record ﬁsh passage at the lower end of the morice river when ﬁsh left or entered the study area. another station was set approximately 300 m downstream of morice lake and primarily functioned to track ﬁsh that travelled upstream into the lake. the third ﬁxed station was located in lower gosnell creek and recorded ﬁsh passage during the spawning migration (fig. 1). a lotek srx 400 receiver was connected to two 4-element yagi antennas mounted at each site: one pointing upstream and one downstream. fixed stations were maintained from may to october 2000 and 2001 and were removed during the winter months when station accessibility was difﬁcult. spawning of bull trout was assessed during nine downstream snorkel ﬂoat surveys, four of the nanika river (16, 23 september 2000; 20, 26 september 2001) and ﬁve of the upper morice river (15 september 2000; 9, 14, 26 september and 10 october 2001). snorkel surveys used three observers spread across the wetted width of the river, ﬂoating parallel downstream. if necessary, sections of rivers were ﬂoated repeatedly to conﬁrm observations. during 2001, spawning was visually conﬁrmed in tributaries by viewing pairs of bull trout on redds. spawning was assumed for bull trout that migrated to these same spawning areas in 2000. statistical analysis trout distance between observations for individual bull trout was calculated for each tracking ﬂight by dividing the distance moved between tracking ﬂights by the number of days between ﬂights. to avoid introducing a bias as a result of the tagging procedure, the ﬁrst two distance measurements from the telemetry contacts for each individual were excluded from the analysis. in addition, distance measurements were terminated for bull if ﬁsh movement ceased permanently. of the 93 ﬁsh tagged over the 2 years, 68 ﬁsh were included in the analysis; three ﬁsh were excluded as they were never located after tagging, four were presumed dead because of lack of movement, and 18 were located on less than seven telemetry ﬂights from june to september. a minimum of nine and a maximum of 38 distance measurements for each ﬁsh were used; average 24 measurements per ﬁsh. although, we refer to the observations between tracking ﬂights as distance moved per day, it is a conservative estimate of rate as not all movements would be expected to be directional. distance moved between observations was standardised by days for each bull trout by dividing the distance moved between tracking ﬂights by the number of days between ﬂights, and the average distance moved per month calculated. differences in monthly movement for all ﬁsh were analysed using anova followed by tukey’s test. to examine when statistically signiﬁcant differences in distance moved per day occurred, we used a change point test (siegal & castellan 1988). the change point test determined whether there had been a change in the underlying process which generates the sequence of events (i.e., rate of movement based on radio-tracking locations) and identiﬁed the time at which the change occurred. the test assumes that the observations form an ordered sequence, and that initially, the distribution of responses has one median, and at some point there is a shift in the median of the distribution. the differences in movement between tracking ﬂights were calculated for each ﬁsh, ranked and the sum of the ranks of the variables was calculated at each point. the difference between the observed and predicted sum of ranks at each point was calculated to determine where a signiﬁcant difference occurred which corresponded to the change point date. if the change point date occurred prior to migration to the spawning grounds, the distance from the location when the change point date occurred to the most upstream location recorded for that ﬁsh was compared with day of the year by linear regression analysis. located at principal component analyses (pca) using a vari- ance–covariance matrix with varimax rotation was used to assess whether life-history groups existed in the morice watershed. we incorporated mean monthly location within the watershed over the year, mean monthly movement, ﬁsh size, age and morphometric measurements. spatial (geographical) location of bull trout within the watershed was assigned to a river kilometre on the morice river; beginning at the conﬂuence of the morice and bulkley rivers (km 0) and terminating at kidprice falls, the upstream end of the nanika river (km 116). bull trout using tributary habitat were assigned the kilometre number nearest the conﬂuence of the tributary stream with the mainstem river for the duration they remained in the tributary. the daily kilometre numbers were averaged for each month and standardised by dividing by the highest kilometre number. mean movement per year was calculated from the monthly values. move- ment, length and age were also standardised using the same method as spatial location. girth and upper jaw length were standardised for size by dividing by fl. a grand mean was calculated from the monthly means for river km and movement rate. of the 68 bull trout, we were able to track 39 ﬁsh over the winter months and include in this analysis. fish were assigned groups based on habitat used throughout the year: ‘lake’ for ﬁsh that spent more than 2 months in morice lake, ‘tribu- tary’ for ﬁsh that migrated to tributaries during june to location and timing of habitat use by bull trout september and ‘mainstem’ for ﬁsh that only inhabited morice and nanika rivers. differences in mean principal component (pc) scores among the groups of ﬁsh were analysed using anova followed by tukey’s test. to assess population structure based on movement and spawning location, pca using a variance–covari- ance matrix was also conducted for location and movement of ﬁsh during the time of year when spawning bull trout used tributary habitat (june to september). a data matrix was created with mean monthly location, mean daily movement for each month, ﬁsh size and age. in addition, the different locations that ﬁsh spawn in the watershed were ordinated following the discriminant ordination method described by pielou (1984); between june and sep- tember ﬁsh were found in the nanika river, redslide creek, upper morice river, gosnell creek and tribu- taries, thautil river and tributaries, middle morice river, houston tommy creek, gold creek and lower morice river. differences in mean principal compo- nent scores among the groups of ﬁsh were analysed using anova followed by tukey’s test. sixty-eight bull trout were used in the analysis as outlined above. mean fl, age, weight and condition factor were calculated for individuals in groups identiﬁed by habitat use and also for the groups identiﬁed by pca during the summer/autumn. condition factor was calculated as weight (g)/[fl (cm)]3 · 100. anova was used to determine signiﬁcant differences among groups. movement during winter/spring and summer/ autumn for ﬁsh identiﬁed by spawning location were also compared using anova. when factors were found to be statistically signiﬁcant, tukey’s test was used to determine differences between the treatments and time interval. statistical signiﬁcance was taken at a level of p < 0.05. results of the 68 ﬁsh used in the analysis, 24 of the ﬁsh tracked in the ﬁrst year were also followed in the second year; three ﬁsh spawned only in 2000, eight ﬁsh spawned only in 2001, three spawned in both years, and 10 ﬁsh spent both years in mainstem rivers. direct observation identiﬁed ﬁve tributaries of the morice river as spawning areas: redslide creek, gosnell creek, thautil river, houston tommy creek and gold creek. during stream surveys, bull trout redds were identiﬁed in gosnell creek (82 redds), crystal creek (a tributary of gosnell creek, eight redds), denys creek (a tributary of thautil river, 17 redds), and gold creek (two redds). due to difﬁculty of access or water clarity, spawning redds were not veriﬁed for houston tommy creek, upper thautil river and redslide creek (fig. 1). movement of bull trout within the morice river var- ied seasonally (f11,537 ¼ 8.17; p < 0.001; fig. 2a); 297 bahr & shrimpton movement was signiﬁcantly greater in september than all other months except june, july and august. the months of increased movement coincided with migra- tion into tributaries to spawning habitat (fig. 2b). eighteen of 43 ﬁsh tracked in 2000 and 22 of 51 ﬁsh tracked in 2001 were observed to migrate to spawning regions in the morice river watershed. movement differed signiﬁcantly by month (f3,343 ¼ 5.10; p < 0.005), between ﬁsh migrating into tributaries and ﬁsh remained in the mainstem (f1,343 ¼ 28.64; that p < 0.001), and interaction between the two factors was signiﬁcant (f3,343 ¼ 8.19; p < 0.001). migration to spawning areas within the watershed accounted for in movement observed the (fig. 2a). following spawning, bull trout generally migrated rapidly out of the tributaries back to the mainstem rivers, contributing to the highest rate of movement generally decreased after spawning and remained at low levels during winter. in september. movement signiﬁcant increase there was no synchronous date when the change point statistic was signiﬁcant. in fact, migration timing to spawning areas was asynchronous and occurred over a number of months. fish began to enter gosnell creek watershed in early june, thautil river water- shed in late june and redslide creek in late july. change point dates were not always identiﬁed at the onset of migration; some occurred when bull trout were at their spawning locations, or after they had made their migration out of the tributaries. thirty-three bull trout had change point dates that occurred prior to migration to the spawning grounds. distance travelled from the location when the change point was signi- ﬁcant to the most upstream location in the tributary was inversely related to the change point date (fig. 2c). although the relationship was signiﬁcant, there was considerable variation. examination of ﬁsh grouped by spawning location showed a signiﬁcant linear relationship was found between the change point date and the distance that bull trout travelled to (a)  ) 1 – y a d m k ( d e v o m e c n a t s d i tributaries mainstem * * * * 1 0 d c * * * ab abc * bc bc a c (b) 50 0 2000 2001 s e i r a t u b i r t n i h s i f % (c) 100 m) k ( e c n a t s d i 50 0 298 redslide creek gosnell creek thautil river gold creek houton tommy creek   j   f   m   a   m   j   j   a   s   o   n   d fig. 2. (a) average rate of movement for )1) for bull trout cal- each month (kmæday culated over both years of the study. *months where the mean daily movement differed signiﬁcantly from the september value. average rate of movement for ﬁsh migrating to tributaries and ﬁsh remaining in the mainstem of the river is shown for june to september. values with a common letter do not differ signiﬁcantly. (b) the percentage of radiotagged ﬁsh migrating into tributaries in the 2 years of the study. (c) relationship between change point date (date of onset of upstream migration to tri- butary habitat) and distance travelled from location on that date to the most upstream location in the tributary. linear regression for all groups combined (f1,31 ¼ 6.73; p < 0.01; r2 ¼ 0.178) is indicated by the solid line. interestingly, spawning sites for ﬁsh migrating to redslide creek (f1,6 ¼ 9.78; p < 0.05) and thautil river (f1,7 ¼ 15.2; p < 0.01) suggesting that ﬁsh that move farther to spawning areas begin their migration earlier in the season. no such relationship, however, was observed for ﬁsh migrating into gosnell creek (f1,9 ¼ 0.33; p > 0.5). initiation of movement was early in the season for ﬁsh migrating to gold creek and houston tommy creek to spawn, and a positive relationship existed between change point date and distance to spawning sites (f1,3 ¼ 12.2; p < 0.05). not all trout migrated to tributary habitat and those that remained in mainstem rivers were assumed not to have spawned. snorkel surveys of the upper morice river and nanika river, did not identify ﬁsh that showed spawning colouration in the mainstem habitat and bull trout were not holding over redds. bull trout in the upper morice tended to reside in a short 6.5-km section of the river just downstream of morice lake. similarly, the ﬁsh in the nanika inhabited a small 4.7-km section of the upper nanika river, below kidprice falls. within the middle and lower morice, bull trout were dispersed over a greater distance. the radiotagged bull bull trout were found to utilise tributary, mainstem and lake habitat over the year. all ﬁsh in this study used mainstem habitat at some point during the year. many ﬁsh were found to migrate into tributary habitat, but only during the spawning season. morice lake was used primarily as a corridor for movement between river systems; however, four ﬁsh spent a portion of the winter months in morice lake (novem- ber to april). two of the morice lake ﬁsh were found in atna bay (fig. 1) and the other two were not detected from november to april when they migrated to the upper morice. principal component analysis on movement and location data throughout the year, size, age, and morphometrics, did not result in distinct clusters. total variance explained for pc1 was 70.7% and for pc2 was 26.2%. component loadings for all the radiotagged ﬁsh are shown in fig. 3. pc1 was highly negatively correlated with movement, and moderately positively correlated with river km. pc2 was highly negatively correlated with river km. pc1 differed signiﬁcantly for lake, mainstem and tributary (f2,36 ¼ 7.45; p < 0.005). tukey’s test indicated signiﬁcant differences between mainstem and tributary ﬁsh. pc2 also differed signiﬁcantly among groups (f2,36 ¼ 3.60; p < 0.05). indicate signiﬁcant tukey’s test, however, did not differences between any of the groups. although movement was variable within all groups of ﬁsh observed in the watershed, ﬁsh lower in the watershed showed a higher rate of movement and tended to be habitat the three groups: smaller. bull grouped trout by location and timing of habitat use by bull trout 2 c p 0.30 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 lake mainstem tributaries –0.1 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.1 pc1 fig. 3. plot of the character loadings of the ﬁrst two principal components (pc1 and pc2) based on the variance–covariance matrix for size, age, morphometrics, average rate of movement for the year, and mean spatial location over the year for bull trout in the morice river watershed. symbols refer to habitat utilised by ﬁsh. in weight signiﬁcantly (f2,35 ¼ 11.26; differed length (f2,36 ¼ 6.34; p < 0.005) and p < 0.0005), age (f2,35 ¼ 3.37; p < 0.05), but not condition factor (f2,35 ¼ 0.09; p > 0.5). fish that were found in morice lake during the winter were signiﬁcantly heavier and longer than all other groups and signiﬁ- cantly older than ﬁsh that utilised tributary habitat (table 1). all radiotagged ﬁsh were located in the morice river or tributaries during the summer and fall. principal component analysis on average movement per month, average monthly location, spawning loca- tion, fl and age of bull trout from june to september, resulted in three components. variance explained by pc1 was 60.2%, pc2 was 11.6%, and pc3 was 8.1%. pc1 reﬂected river km, pc2 and pc3 varied with movement and spawning location. age and fl had little effect on any of the components. bull trout clustered into ﬁve groups based on the three principal components: ﬁsh that spawned in gosnell creek and tributaries; ﬁsh that spawned in thautil river and tributaries; ﬁsh from nanika river and redslide creek; ﬁsh from lower morice and spawners from gold and houston tommy creeks; and upper morice ﬁsh (fig. 4). pc1 differed signiﬁcantly for the ﬁve groups (f4,63 ¼ 100.3; p < 0.001). the nanika group and lower morice group differed signiﬁcantly from all other groups. the gosnell group did not differ signiﬁcantly from upper morice and thautil groups; thautil and upper morice differed signiﬁcantly. differences in pc2 (f4,63 ¼ 936.8; p < 0.001) and pc3 (f4,63 ¼ 4638; p < 0.001) between the ﬁve 299 bahr & shrimpton table 1. fork length, weight, condition factor and age of groups of bull trout determined by habitat utilisation in the morice river watershed and location in the watershed in summer/autumn. weight (kg) fork length (mm) condition factor )3)] [100 (gæcm age (years) group (n) habitat lake (4) mainstem (14) tributaries (21) all (39) summer/fall 2.55 ± 0.51a 634 ± 48a 1.00 ± 0.12 1.38 ± 0.09b 524 ± 14b 1.07 ± 0.04 1.35 ± 0.10b 518 ± 13b 1.03 ± 0.05 1.49 ± 0.10 532 ± 11 1.04 ± 0.03 lower morice (10) 1.72 ± 0.16 545 ± 10ab 1.03 ± 0.06 1.45 ± 0.11 510 ± 17a 1.01 ± 0.05 thautil (12) 1.46 ± 0.14 512 ± 10a 0.98 ± 0.04 gosnell (16) 1.46 ± 0.10 527 ± 16ab 1.02 ± 0.09 upper morice (9) 1.86 ± 0.16 580 ± 16b 0.97 ± 0.03 nanika (21) all (68) 1.62 ± 0.07 540 ± 7 1.00 ± 0.02 9.0 ± 1.5a 7.5 ± 0.4ab 7.0 ± 0.3b 7.4 ± 0.3 7.8 ± 0.4ab 6.5 ± 0.3a 7.4 ± 0.3ab 8.0 ± 0.4ab 8.8 ± 0.5b 7.8 ± 0.2 all values are given as mean with one standard error. values with a common letter do not differ signiﬁcantly. groups were also highly signiﬁcant. tukey’s test indicated that all groups differed signiﬁcantly for pc2, except for upper morice and lower morice, and all groups differed signiﬁcantly for pc3. interestingly, ﬁsh from the lower morice clustered with ﬁsh that spawned in both houston tommy creek and gold creek, despite the different discriminant ordination code assigned. similarly, ﬁsh that spawned in redslide creek could not be differentiated from ﬁsh that remained in nanika river. most of the nanika river ﬁsh migrated to spawn in redslide creek, but ﬁsh from the nanika were also found to migrate to the upper morice and denys creek (thautil river) during the spawning season. upper morice ﬁsh spawned in all regions of the watershed. the middle morice ﬁsh moved and spawned in gosnell, houston tommy and gold creeks. the lower morice group included bull trout that used only the lower morice river, and spawned in houston tommy creek, gold creek, gosnell creek, or denys creek (thautil river). bull trout grouped by summer/autumn location differed signiﬁcantly in age (f4,62 ¼ 3.74; p < 0.01) and length (f4,63 ¼ 4.84; p < 0.002), but not weight (f4,61 ¼ 1.75; p > 0.1) or condition factor (table 1). nanika river ﬁsh were on average the oldest ﬁsh in the system and were signiﬁcantly older than ﬁsh spawning in the thautil river. nanika ﬁsh also had signiﬁcantly greater fork lengths than thautil and gosnell ﬁsh. (f4,61 ¼ 0.34; p > 0.5) movement for ﬁsh identiﬁed by spawning location did not differ signiﬁcantly during the winter and spring (f4,57 ¼ 1.36; p > 0.2), independent of location with- in the watershed (fig. 5a). fish that spawned in the thautil and gosnell systems, however, migrated from a wider range of locations in the morice watershed. from june to september, when daily movement increased signiﬁcantly for bull trout migrating to spawning areas (fig. 2), the distance moved per day varied among the spawning populations (f4,63 ¼ 9.80; p < 0.001). rate of movement for ﬁsh within the nanika system was signiﬁcantly lower than ﬁsh migrating to gosnell creek, thautil river or within the lower morice (fig. 5b). movement of ﬁsh within the upper morice was marginally higher than the nanika, but still signiﬁcantly lower than lower morice and gosnell creek ﬁsh. discussion our analysis demonstrates that variation in spatial location and distance moved for bull trout exists in the morice river watershed. the presence of multiple life- thautil upper morice 0.2 0.1 0.0 –0.1 gosnell lower morice nanika 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 –0.2 –0.1 0.0 0.1 pc3 morice lake nanika river upper morice river middle morice river lower morice river 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.2 pc1 2 c p 3 c p 0.2 0.1 0.0 –0.1 0.1 0.0 –0.1 –0.2 300 fig. 4. plot of the character loadings of the ﬁrst three principal components (pc1, pc2, and pc3) based on the variance–covariance matrix for size, age, rate of movement per month, spatial location and ordinal location during september in the morice river watershed. data used in the analysis were limited to observations from june to september, when migration rate increased and bull trout were found to utilise tributary habitat. symbols refer to location of ﬁsh in the morice watershed during the winter/spring. for bull trout 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 ) 1 – y a d m k (  d e v o m e c n a  t s d i nanika river upper morice gosnell creek thautil river lower morice ** ** * (a) (b) 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 location (river km) )1) for bull trout in the morice fig. 5. rate of movement (kmæday river watershed (a) from october to may and (b) from june to september versus location (river km). values are given as mean ± 1 sd. fish were grouped by clusters determined from pca on data from june to september (fig. 4). *value differs signiﬁcantly from the nanika cluster; **value differs signiﬁcantly from the nanika and upper morice clusters. history forms within the bull trout tagged for this study, however, was not evident. fish using different habitats separated by location and rate of movement, but not by morphology, size or age has been demon- strated in arctic char (sku´ lason et al. 1996). bull trout were tracked primarily in mainstem rivers and princi- pally moved to tributaries to spawn. there was no evidence for spawning within the mainstem rivers and morice lake appeared to be used primarily as a corridor for moving between river systems. life histories based on movement patterns would classify bull trout in the morice river system as ﬂuvial (goetz 1989; rieman & mcintyre 1993, 1996; mcphail & baxter 1996; swanberg 1997). potential exceptions are the four ﬁsh that spent part of the winter in morice lake. each of these ﬁsh were in the lake for at least 4 months, however all four spent the rest of the year in nanika river or upper morice river. the motivation to move into the river was not to migrate to spawning habitat; all four ﬁsh were found to inhabit areas where spawning was not identiﬁed. one ﬁsh resided in nanika river in the ﬁrst year, overwintered in morice lake, resided in nanika river for most of the second year, and migrated into redslide creek in august putatively to spawn. thus, even ﬁsh that were found to utilise morice lake spent the majority of the year in morice river and tributaries, and would also be classiﬁed as ﬂuvial ﬁsh. factors other than life history are more likely to account for the variation in movement and distribution observed in bull trout from the morice river water- shed. bull trout clustered spatially into groups within the morice river mainstem, probably because of the presence of speciﬁc habitat and potentially high food availability. although mainstem habitat appears to be location and timing of habitat use by bull trout suitable for spawning in both the upper morice and nanika rivers, a number of observations suggest that mainstem ﬁsh did not spawn. when observed in the mainstem, bull trout were located individually down- stream of chinook or sockeye redds, and were not observed to demonstrate spawning behaviour such as digging and quivering (goetz 1989). the apparent lack of spawning in large rivers by bull trout may be an artefact of sampling as visual observations are difﬁcult (mcphail & baxter 1996). this is a concern in the present study as the observations made during ﬂoating were limited to areas that were safe to ﬂoat. all potential spawning habitats could not be assessed because observers could not always unobtrusively investigate areas with undercut banks, overhanging vegetation or debris jams. we cannot, therefore, conclude that spawning did not occur in the mainstem. mainstem bull trout, however, did not display sexually dimorphic characteristics such as obvious colour differences between males and females, and kype development (mcphail & baxter 1996). bull trout were not observed to spend time during either migratory season in morice lake. locations from radio tracking indicate that bull trout used morice lake as a corridor for movement; particularly between the nanika and morice rivers (fig. 1). the four ﬁsh that appeared to overwinter in morice lake were not detected potentially because of the inability of radio signals to penetrate through deep water in the lake. morice lake supports a population of lake_trout, and donald & alger (1993) found that lake_trout displace bull trout. they indicated that niche overlap and the potential for competition between the two species was substantial within 34 lakes studied in alberta, british columbia and montana. it is possible that a similar interaction between lake_trout and bull trout may occur in morice lake. it is interesting that the four bull trout found in morice lake for part of the winter were signiﬁcantly larger than all other ﬁsh radiotagged. whether these ﬁsh remained exclusively in the lake or exploited other tributaries ﬂowing into the lake is not clear, although two of the ﬁsh were tracked in atna bay (fig. 1). bull trout in the morice river watershed were observed to use speciﬁc areas for spawning. radio- tagged ﬁsh spawned in ﬁve tributaries; however, redd distribution was clumped within each of the tributar- ies, and movement to the same areas was observed by many of the radiotagged ﬁsh in both years. other research has shown that bull trout migrate to tributaries to spawn (fraley & shepard 1989; rieman & mcintyre 1993, 1996; mcphail & baxter 1996; baxter & mcphail 1999) but may spawn in only a portion of the available stream reaches (fraley & shepard 1989; baxter & mcphail 1999), similar to the population of bull trout in the morice river watershed. 301 bahr & shrimpton analysis of movement, river kilometre and spawn- ing location indicated that ﬁve groups were present within the morice river. all ﬁve groups showed variation in the average distances moved per day (fig. 4), although, signiﬁcant differences between the groups was only evident during the spawning season (fig. 5). differences in distances moved per day may be representative of the total distance to the location of spawning areas. for example, ﬁsh that migrated to the thautil or gosnell systems, where the majority of redds were found in the upper reaches, moved longer distances to the spawning grounds and had corre- spondingly higher rates of movement per day. bull trout in the nanika group had much lower rates of movement; areas for spawning in redslide creek are much closer to the nanika river than those in thautil/ gosnell are to the mainstem morice river. rates per day were highest movement also varied seasonally. average move- from june to ment september, which corresponded to the spawning migration. these movements were primarily associ- ated with migration up tributaries, and there was no evidence of spawning in the mainstem morice or nanika rivers. fluvial bull trout are known to migrate from large rivers into smaller rivers to spawn, and these migrations generally occur in late summer when water temperatures are high and water levels are low (mcphail & baxter 1996). timing of migrations, ground surveys of locations of redds, and condition of recaptured ﬁsh during late summer indicated that bull trout were moving to and from spawning locations in the morice system. migration to spawning grounds appears to be the principle motivation for movement to tributary systems. bull trout utilised the same locations in each of the ﬁve tributaries in the morice river watershed for spawning in both study years. this pattern has been observed in other watersheds despite the availability of what appears to be suitable alternate spawning habitat (baxter & mcphail 1999; hveneg- aard & thera 2001). entrance to tributaries by bull trout occurred up to 3 months in advance of the spawning window. gosnell creek was most heavily utilised by radiotagged bull trout and it contained the largest proportion of observed redds. although bull trout utilised all reaches of gosnell creek, and habitat that appeared suitable for spawning was abundant, spawning was not assumed for bull trout that remained in lower gosnell creek. fish with the highest rates of migration per day were often associated with directed migrations to spawning habitat. some ﬁsh that moved at rates per day migrated only to the lower reaches of gosnell creek. redds and aggregations of bull trout were not identiﬁed during ground surveys and ﬂoating in this area. bull trout located in lower gosnell creek held in lower 302 deep pools and were found in areas where pink salmon were spawning. non-spawning bull trout were likely feeding on eggs deposited by pink salmon. migration of non-spawning ﬁsh to tributaries has also been observed (swanberg 1997). tributaries of the upper blackfoot river, montana, exhibit lower prey densities than the mainstem and bull trout appear to utilise the tributaries as a refuge to avoid seasonally unfavour- able temperatures in the mainstem. this hypothesis is unlikely in this study as other bull trout remained in the morice river during the spawning season. tem- peratures for the morice river and tributaries where bull trout were found to spawn were similar and mean daily temperature did not exceed 14 °c. further, bull trout that migrated up the other four tributaries to spawn were not observed holding in the tributaries for long periods of time prior to the spawning season as they did in gosnell creek. the other tributaries where spawning was documented in the morice watershed lacked sufﬁcient habitat for adult bull trout. conse- quently, there is a much stronger correlation between migratory distance and initiation date for ﬁsh that utilised redslide creek and thautil river to spawn (fig. 2c). the corresponding lack of correlation between these two variables for gosnell creek may be due to use of this system for purposes other than spawning. a biannual spawning cycle is probable for bull trout in the morice watershed, consistent with other studies (fraley & shepard 1989; goetz 1989; hvenegaard & thera 2001). fish tagged in this study and observed for only 1 year may have remained in the mainstem if it was not a year to spawn. alternate year spawning was observed in the present study (n ¼ 11), as was spawning in both years (n ¼ 3) and no spawning in either year (n ¼ 10). swanberg (1997) proposed that some of the bull trout in the blackfoot river, montana, may have remained in the mainstem if they were not yet sexually mature. this is unlikely in the morice river watershed as radiotagging was biased to include ﬁsh of large fl that had the greatest likelihood of sexual maturity. alternate year spawning among many of the ﬁsh tagged in this study is probable, and emphasises the need for long-term monitoring. bull trout migrated to spawning locations from all areas of the watershed and many (29 of 39) were observed to return to within approximately 1 km of the watershed they had resided in before the spawning migration, and remained there to overwinter or until migrating to other overwintering areas. site ﬁdelity to overwintering grounds is not without precedence in the literature. bull in the blackfoot river, montana, returned to overwintering grounds suggest- ing a precise homing ability (swanberg 1997). a similar homing ability may be occurring in the morice river population of bull trout. alternately, bull trout trout may cluster in these regions because of potentially high food availability. the morice system has a number of ﬁsh species that bull trout may feed on as they are aggressive piscivores and eat a variety of other species (boag 1987; goetz 1989; donald & alger 1993; mcphail & baxter 1996; beauchamp & van tassell 2001). additionally, many salmonids spawn in the upper nanika and upper morice rivers in both the spring and fall. bull trout were observed individually downstream of salmon redds in these areas during snorkel surveys, suggesting that bull trout may feed on eggs from other species (boag 1987). in addition, upper nanika and upper morice mainstem areas have deep sections (>3 m) that provide cover from terrestrial and avian predators. habitat in these two areas, therefore, may be preferred because of the available food and suitable cover. areas in the lower morice river have similar habitat characteristics; however, these ﬁsh moved larger distances comparat- ively. the lower morice river is a long section of river (>50 km) with areas of suitable feeding and overwin- tering habitat throughout but there does not appear to be a small concentrated section of river that all lower morice bull inhabit, as occurs in the upper morice or nanika rivers. further, overwintering hab- itat may limit distributions of bull trout at this latitude because many of the tributary streams freeze during the winter. deep sections throughout the morice and nanika rivers also provide favourable overwintering habitat. additionally, morice and kidprice lakes moderate environmental factors in the adjacent morice and nanika rivers such as water temperature and ﬂow. the radio telemetry data indicated that population structure based on geographical separation exists within bull trout from the morice river watershed. analysis indicated that there are ﬁve groups repre- senting ﬁve geographical regions within the watershed where bull trout are commonly found and/or observed to spawn. the variation in distances moved by some of the radiotagged ﬁsh suggests that there is considerable movement between the regions of the watershed. for example, a ﬁsh captured and tagged in the nanika river migrated to thautil river system to spawn in 2000, and remained in the nanika river during 2001. in addition, six ﬁsh tagged in the upper morice river, migrated to the nanika river where they overwin- tered, then spawned in redslide creek. trout the groups of bull trout determined in this study correspond well with geographically separated hab- itat within the watershed. five habitat locations are important for spawning bull trout: redslide creek, gosnell and crystal creeks, thautil river and denys creek, houston tommy creek, and gold creek. although there is no evidence of multiple life-history forms from the radio telemetry data, if spawning site ﬁdelity is strong and there is little location and timing of habitat use by bull trout migration between geographical regions, multiple stocks may exist within the morice river watershed. population structure based on genetics has been shown in populations with both small and large geographical scales. population structure in bull trout exists in the lightning creek watershed in idaho (spruell et al. 1999) and also across british columbia and northern washington (taylor et al. 2001). the three bull that spawned in both years of the study, spawned in the same system each year. bull trout using geographically distinct areas for spawning in the morice river system, therefore, may also be distinct genetically. trout resumen 1. desde abril del an˜o 2000 hasta noviembre del 2001, examinamos con te´cnicas radio-teleme´tricas, los movimientos y el uso del ha´bitat por salvelinus conﬂuentus en la cuenca del rı´o morice (nor-oeste de la columbia brita´nica). 2. s. conﬂuentus principalmente utilizo´ en canal central. durante el invierno, observamos pequen˜os movimientos a lo largo de la cuenca. desde junio hasta septiembre, los movimientos se incrementaron y estuvieron correlacionados con migraciones hacia los aﬂuentes. observamos directamente a s. conﬂuentus reproducie´ndose en los aﬂuentes del rı´o morice pero nunca en el canal central. 3. muchos de los peces (n ¼ 48) migraron hacia el lugar de reproduccio´n mas cercano pero unos peces (n ¼ 7) hicieron migraciones extensivas hacia otras regiones de la cuenca para reproducirse. los peces que se reprodujeron volvieron a la misma localidad reproductora en ambos an˜os de estudio. variaciones en los datos espaciales y de movimientos parecie- ron, por ello, ligados a la disponibilidad de ha´bitat apropiado y no a diferencias en la biologı´a como ha sido observado en grandes individuos de s. conﬂuentus. acknowledgements we wish to thank dana atagi (bc ministry of water, land and air protection, wlap), mark beere (wlap), john brockley (canfor), jeff burrows (wlap), adrian clarke (unbc), paul giroux (wlap), deidre quinlan (houston forest products), melissa todd (houston forest products) and todd zimmerling (applied ecosystem management ltd) for providing us with information, equipment and assistance with ﬁeld work. we thank daniel heath and jeff burrows for their critical review of an earlier version of this manuscript. this research was funded by forest renewal british columbia in connection with canfor and houston forest products and by the bc habitat conser- vation trust fund. mab was supported by a natural sciences and engineering research council of canada industrial postgraduate scholarship with applied ecosystem manage- ment ltd of terrace, bc. references baxter, j.s. & mcphail, j.d. 1999. the inﬂuence of redd site selection, groundwater upwelling, and over-winter incubation 303 bahr & shrimpton temperature on survival of bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) from egg to alevin. canadian journal of zoology 77: 1233– 1239. beauchamp, d.a. & van tassell, j.j. 2001. modeling seasonal trophic interactions of adﬂuvial bull in lake billy chinook, oregon. transactions of the american fisheries society 130: 204–216. trout boag, t.d. 1987. food habits of bull char, salvelinus conﬂu- entus, and rainbow trout, salmo gairdneri, coexisting in a foothills stream in northern alberta. canadian field-natur- alist 101: 56–62. burrows, j., euchner, t. & baccante, n. 2001. bull trout movement patterns: halfway river and peace river progress. in: brewin, m.k., paul, a.j. & monita, m. eds. bull trout ii conference proceedings. calgary, alberta: trout unlimited canada, pp. 153–157. bustard, d. 1999. 1:20 000 intensive landscape-based ﬁsh and ﬁsh habitat inventory for the gosnell creek watershed, frbc project hrfrbc no. 15. activity no. 103nor-c087-001- 1999. houston, bc: houston forest products ltd. donald, d.b. & alger, d.j. 1993. geographic distribution, species displacement, and niche overlap for lake_trout and bull trout in mountain lakes. canadian journal of zoology 71: 238–247. fraley, j.j. & shepard, b.b. 1989. life history, ecology and population status of migratory bull trout (salvelinus con- ﬂuentus) in the flathead lake and river system, montana. northwest science 63: 133–141. goetz, f. 1989. biology of the bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) a literature review. eugene, or: us department of agricul- ture, forest service, willamette national forest. 53 pp. haas, g.r. & mcphail, j.d. 1991. systematics and distributions of dolly varden (salvelinus_malma) and bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) in north america. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 48: 2191–2211. hvenegaard, p.j. & thera, t.m. 2001. monitoring the bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) spawning run in lynx creek, a tributary to the kakwa river, west central alberta. in: brewin, m.k., paul a.j. & monita m., eds. bull trout ii conference proceedings. calgary, alberta: trout unlimited canada, pp. 147–151. jackson, d.a., peres-neto, p.r. & olden, j.d. 2001. what controls who is where in freshwater ﬁsh communities – the roles of biotic, abiotic, and spatial factors. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 58: 157–170. mcphail, j.d. & baxter, j. 1996. a review of bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) life history and habitat use in relation to compensation and improvement opportunities. fisheries management report no. 104. 35 pp. pielou, e.c. 1984. the interpretation of ecological data: a primer on classiﬁcation and ordination. new york: john wiley and sons. 263 pp. rieman, b.e. & mcintyre, j.d. 1993. demographic and habitat requirements for conservation of bull trout, general technical report int-302. ogden, ut: u.s. department of agricul- ture, forest service, intermountain research station. rieman, b.e. & mcintyre, j.d. 1996. spatial and temporal variability in bull trout redd counts. north american journal of fisheries management 16: 132–141. rieman, b.e. & myers, d.l. 1997. use of redd counts to detect trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus) populations. trends in bull conservation biology 11: 1015–1018. schluter, d. & mcphail, j.d. 1993. character displacement and replicate adaptive radiation. trends in ecology and evolution 8: 197–200. siegal, s. & castellan, n.j. 1988. nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences. new york: mcgraw-hill, inc. 399 pp. sku´ lason, s., snorrason, s.s., noakes, d.l.g., & fergusson, m.m. 1996. genetic basis of life history variations among sympatric morphs of arctic char, salvelinus_alpinus. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 53: 1807–1813. spruell, p., rieman, b.e., knudsen, k.l., utter, f.m. & allendorf, f.w. 1999. genetic population structure within streams: microsatellite analysis of bull trout populations. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 114–121. swanberg, t.r. 1997. movements of and habitat use by ﬂuvial bull trout in the blackfoot river, montana. transactions of the american fisheries society 126: 735–746. taylor, e.b., redenbach, z., costello, a.b., pollard, s.j. & pacas, c.j. 2001. nested analysis of genetic diversity in northwestern north american char, dolly varden (salvelinus_malma) and bull trout (salvelinus conﬂuentus). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 58: 406–420. walters, c. & korman, j. 1999. salmon stocks. background paper no. 1999/1b. vancouver, bc: paciﬁc fisheries resource conservation council. ward, d.l. & miller, l.m. 1988. using radio telemetry in ﬁsheries investigations, information reports number 88-7. salem, or: oregon department of fish and wildlife, research and development section. winter, j.d. 1996. advances in underwater biotelemetry. in: murphy, b.r. & willis, d.w. eds. fisheries techniques, 2nd edn. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 555–590. 304  