ecology of freshwater fish 2011: 20: 327 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved editorial ó 2011 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish on the 20th anniversary of eff and the luarca symposium i still remember the time when erik mortensen told me over the telephone that munsksgaard publ. co. had ﬁnally accepted his proposal on a new journal – ecology of freshwater fish. and erik’s leading idea for ecology of freshwater fish was to ‘cross- communicate interdisciplinary results obtained by single, specialised theoretical and applied tendencies always intended for a broad international audience’ (lobo´n-cervia´ & mortensen 2002). however what caught me by surprise, and far beyond my knowledge, was erik’s determination to involve me in the editorial team! i must confess that the earliest years of eff were challenging, needless to say amazing, and erik’s everlasting enthusiasm lit the way for each and every one. despite the upheaval caused by erik’s unexpected decease, this notion remained as the mainstream of eff. the recent incorporation of asbjorn vollestad (norway) and dave heins (usa) as new editors; coupled with helpful editorial assistance from bernard hugueny (france) and edie marsh-matthew (usa) have operated as key factors which enhanced the scientiﬁc quality of eff. as a result, eff developed profoundly and as a well-established international forum of ﬁsh ecology research. this is exempliﬁed by the remarkable increment seen in the number of manuscript submissions and also in the number of contributing countries in which manuscripts are sub- mitted in recent years. however, unfortunately, there is always a dark side of the moon and in our case it is the limited number of printed pages, thereby implies that the acceptance rate for manuscripts has gradually declined to only 30%. how to celebrate the 20th anniversary of eff? the idea was born during a short talk with john armstrong (uk) and later on with phaedra budy (usa), gustavo gonzalez (spain), asbjorn vollestad (norway) and other highly valuable colleagues. those conversations led us to celebrate the 20th anniversary of eff with a symposı`um focused on the major research interest of erik mortensen– stream-living salmonids, and with a special dedication to the late nicholas hughes; whom passed away while planning his active participation in this meeting. as the former eff symposium ‘ecology of stream ﬁsh: state of the art and future prospects’ [see eff, 1999, 8(3) and eff 2000, 9(1–2)], which was held in april 1998, we felt it was only rightful to hold this 2010 salmonids sym- posium in the same picturesque ‘luarca city’ (astu- rias, northwestern spain). over 120 oral and poster communications, from about 30 different countries, were presented. additionally, in this eff issue, we have put together a special selection of articles, including several reviews, which keep alive the essentials of eff and published with the expectancy that readers would ﬁnd these contributions relevant. the editors of eff and the organisers of the luarca symposium would like to give warm thanks to all those who have contributed to the development of eff, and the merits, if any, belong to the editorial board members, authors and reviewers. javier lobo´n-cervia´ eff – editor in chief reference lobo´n-cervia´, j. & mortensen, e. 2002. 10 years after. ecology of freshwater fish 11: 1. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2011.00522.x 327  