ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 139–145 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved ó 2006 the authors journal compilation ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish population consequences of behaviour in the european bitterling (rhodeus sericeus cyprinidae) smith c, reichard m, douglas a, jurajda p. population consequences of behaviour in the european bitterling (rhodeus sericeus cyprinidae). ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 139–145. ó blackwell munksgaard, 2006 abstract – the european bitterling is a freshwater ﬁsh with an unusual spawning symbiosis with freshwater mussels. female bitterling possess long ovipositors that they use to place their eggs onto the gills of a mussel. males fertilise the eggs by releasing sperm into the inhalant siphon of the mussel. the embryos develop inside the mussel for approximately a month, eventually leaving the mussel as actively swimming larvae. because they use a discrete spawning site that can be readily manipulated they represent an ideal model for linking reproductive decisions with population dynamics. bitterling have been used in ﬁeld and large-scale pool experiments, in combination with modelling and population and genetic studies to investigate the population consequences of behaviour. here we show how male mating tactics, female mate and oviposition decisions, and aggressive interference competition among juveniles, may have signiﬁcant impacts on bitterling population size and population genetics. c. smith1, m. reichard1,2, a. douglas3, p. jurajda2 1department of biology, university of leicester, university road, leicester, uk, 2institute of vertebrate biology, academy of sciences of the czech republic, brno, czech republic, 3school of biology, zoology building, university of aberdeen, aberdeen, uk key words: juvenile; male–male competition; model; oviposition choice; population dynamics; territoriality c. smith, department of biology, university of leicester, university road, leicester le1 7rh, uk; e-mail: cs152@le.ac.uk accepted for publication december 10, 2005 introduction behavioural ecology is founded on the principle that natural and sexual selection favours behavioural decisions that maximize the inclusive ﬁtness of individuals (hamilton 1972; williams 1975). how- ever, the population consequences of this paradigm are unclear (smith & sibly 1985). a central goal in ecology has been to link the behaviour of individuals with population dynamics (ebling & stoddart 1978; smith & sibly 1985; łomnicki 1988; sutherland 1996). yet despite acceptance that population dynam- ics and behaviour may be mutually dependent proces- ses, progress in linking the two has been slow, possibly because population ecologists tend to focus on schedules of birth, death, immigration and emigra- tion without questioning the underlying behavioural contributions to these processes. in contrast, beha- vioural ecologists have primarily concerned them- selves with the adaptive signiﬁcance of behaviour for individuals while ignoring the possibility of popula- tion consequences of behaviour (hassell & may 1985; sutherland 1996). here, we review the research that attempts to link the behaviour of european bitterling (rhodeus sericeus pallas, cyprinidae) with their population dynamics, using a combination of ﬁeld, mesocosm and aquarium experiments, in combination with population and genetic studies, and modelling. research to link behaviour with population processes has focused on male and female reproductive beha- viour and the behaviour of juveniles during early life stages. the european bitterling is a freshwater ﬁsh belong- ing to a cyprinid sub-family (acheilognathinae) with an unusual spawning symbiosis with freshwater mus- sels. during the spawning season, males develop bright nuptial colouration and defend territories around mussels. female bitterling develop long ovipositors doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00131.x 139 smith et al. that they use to place their eggs onto the gills of a mussel through the mussel’s exhalant siphon. males fertilise the eggs by releasing sperm into the inhalant siphon of the mussel, so that water ﬁltered by the mussel carries the sperm to the eggs (for a review see smith et al. 2004). developing embryos reside inside the mussel for approximately 1 month during which time they develop into actively swimming larvae (aldridge 1999). after emergence from a mussel the larvae enter shallow, vegetated margins of lakes and rivers that serve as nursery areas, where they remain until the end of their ﬁrst summer (przybylski & zie˛ba 2000; reichard et al. 2002). at this life stage, the principal predator of bitterling appears to be the european perch (perca ﬂuviatilis) (smith et al. 2000a). at approximately 6 months of age, juvenile bitterling recruit to the adult population and overwin- ter in areas of deep water with spent adults. bitterling rarely live beyond 2 years, and the majority of individuals survive only a single breeding season (smith et al. 2000a). bitterling display remarkable morphological, physiological and behavioural adapta- tions for using mussels as spawning sites, and they represent a valuable model in behavioural, population and evolutionary ecology. the value of the bitterling as a model for linking behaviour with population processes arises from it having a spawning site that can be easily manipulated and assessed for quality. they can also be observed in nature and adapted readily to laboratory conditions. female oviposition decisions four species of unionid freshwater mussel (anodonta anatina, anodonta cygnea, unio pictorum and unio tumidus) are commonly used as spawning hosts by bitterling in western europe (smith et al. 2004). smith et al. (2000b) used ﬁeld experiments to show that female bitterling have preferences for spawning in a. anatina, u. pictorum and u. tumidus, while avoiding spawning in a. cygnea. female bitterling were further shown to avoid mussels that already contained large numbers of bitterling embryos. the mortality rates of bitterling embryos while incubated in mussels were found to be strongly density depend- ent; the strength of density dependence varying among mussel species and strongest in a. cygnea, the species of mussel avoided by bitterling. the oxygen content of the water emerging from the exhalant siphon of the mussel may serve as the cue for mussel choice (smith et al. 2001a). because female preferences for mussels match the survival of their embryos this raises the prospect that oviposition choices by females might have an impact on population size. in a study to test this hypothesis, smith et al. (2000a) incorporated these behavioural preferences for 140 table 1. importance of model components to the correlation between the full and partial models for predicted bitterling population sizes. model component removed discrimination against mussel fullness with embryos discrimination among mussel species refuges perch predators r 0.99 1.00 0.68 0.73 per cent deviation from full model +6 +1 )48 +23 r is the correlation coefﬁcient for the ﬁt of the partial model versus the full model. percentage deviation from the full model is the percentage increase or decrease in population size that results due to the removal of a model component from the full model. this was obtained as the per cent change from a slope of 1 of the gradient from a linear regression of the ﬁtted population size of the partial model as a function of the full model. the intercept has been forced through the origin. embryos had the potential spawning sites by female bitterling into a population model and demonstrated that, whereas discrimination by bitterling among mussel species as hosts for their young had a minor effect on population size, discrim- ination against mussels already containing high num- bers of to reduce populations by 6% compared with random spawnings (table 1). this effect arose because a random (pois- son) distribution of eggs among mussels led to enhanced survival of embryos in those mussels that received few spawnings, ultimately resulting in better recruitment. the weak effect of species discrimination stemmed from the fact that differences among mussels in the density-dependent survival of embryos was less than the strength of density dependence within mussels (smith et al. 2000b). thus, female spawning decisions were shown to play a signiﬁcant, though relatively minor, role in the population dynamics of bitterling, while other variables, such as predation and habitat structure, were of much greater signiﬁcance. male reproductive behaviour alternative male mating behaviours are common in european bitterling (smith et al. 2002, 2003, 2004; reichard et al. 2004a,b). while some males defend territories and attract females, other males adopt sneaking behaviour. both males that do not defend territories and those in adjacent territories attempt to release their sperms over the inhalant siphon of mussels guarded by territorial males, before and after a female has spawned (termed pre- and postoviposi- tion ejaculation, respectively). territorial males re- spond to the presence of competing males by varying sperm expenditure and directing aggression towards competitors (smith et al. 2004). reichard et al. (2004a) examined the mechanisms by which competition for fertilisations affect spawning rate and the spatial scale at which these effects are manifested. using a mesocosm, they experimentally tested whether the number of eggs spawned by females was dependent on the number of available spawning sites, and if so, whether male behaviour, mussel spatial distribution and operational sex ratio (osr) had any effect on spawning rate. for details of materials and methods, see reichard et al. (2004a). reichard et al. (2004a) established that the number of available spawning sites affected spawning rate; the total number of eggs spawned was positively correla- ted with the number of mussels available (fig. 1). in addition, the osr in the immediate vicinity of a mussel (‘local’ osr) correlated with the number of mussels available for oviposition, with local osr male biased at low mussel densities and female biased at high mussel densities (fig. 2). it was also shown that territorial male aggression and the number of territorial male ejaculations were positively correlated with the number of rival male ejaculations. these results could be explained on the basis that the number of eggs spawned by bitterling might be limited by mussel capacity to accommodate eggs. s g g e f o r e b m u n 600 400 200 0 4 8 12 mussel density 16 20 fig. 1. the relationship between the total numbers of bitterling eggs spawned over 24 h by the study population and the number of mussels available for oviposition. 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 o i t a r x e s l a n o i t a r e p o 0.00 0 4 8 12 mussel density 16 20 fig. 2. local male to female operational sex ratio (osr) across different mussel densities. osr was calculated according to kvarnemo & ahnesjo¨ (2002) as: osr ¼ males/(males + females). the dashed line indicates equal osr; values from 0 to 0.49 indicate female-biased and from 0.51 to 1 male-biased osr. population consequences of behaviour in bitterling however, the average number of eggs per mussel (41 eggs) recorded in the study was far below the known carrying capacity of mussels. indeed, up to 132 eggs were found in a single mussel during the experiment and much higher egg densities have frequently been encountered in ﬁeld studies (smith et al. 2004). local osr changed signiﬁcantly with mussel density and osr is known to affect male behaviour (kvarnemo & ahnesjo¨ 2002), with increased male– male interference competition for matings under male- biased osr (emlen 1976; enders 1993; jirotkul 1999). territorial male bitterling were shown to adjust their aggression across mussel densities according to the change in local osr, which inﬂuenced the success of spawning attempts by females. based on these results, reichard et al. (2004a) proposed that male– male competition might affect the total oviposition rate of the experimental population. in a second mesocosm experiment, reichard et al. (2004a) partitioned the effects of ‘total’ male density (total number of males in the population) and ‘local’ male density (manipulated by a proximity between adjacent territories) while holding the number of spawning sites constant. for details of materials and methods, see reichard et al. (2004a). high total male density was correlated with the number of rival males involved in spawning and rival male ejaculation rate. at territorial males increased their aggression towards competing males (fig. 3a), which resulted in a signiﬁcant interaction between total male density and the rate of interruption to female spawning attempts (fig. 3b). the high total male density, when total male density was low, territorial males aggressively defended their territories against rivals, and the rate of aggressive interactions increased as a function of local male density. consequently, the number of unsuccessful spawning attempts by females signiﬁcantly increased, with females abandoning spawning as males interrupted courtship to engage in aggressive attacks against rivals. oddly, at high total male density, territoriality appeared to break down with an increase in local male density. territorial male aggression decreased, with the effect that courtship interruptions were considerably reduced and females were able to spawn with fewer interruptions. thus, the highest male density in the study, which resulted in territoriality being relaxed, may have been at the point at which territoriality was no longer adaptive; high investment in defence by territorial males may have been uneconomic in terms of male reproductive success. fish densities in this experiment were within the range already recorded for bitterling in the wild (smith et al. 2000a), and the same response was observed by smith et al. (2002) under natural condi- tions, with territorial males unable to defend a mussel 141 smith et al. (a) 4.0 l e a m l a i r o t i r r e t ) 1 – n m i ( e t a r i n o s s e r g g a 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 local total (b) 0.5 low high low high low high male density 0.4 0.3 0.2 i g n n w a p s f o e  t a r ) 1 – n m i ( s n o i t p u r r e n t i 0.1 0.0 local total low high low high low high male density fig. 3. male behaviour: (a) rate of aggressive attacks by territorial males towards rival males; (b) rate of spawning interruptions. error bars are 1 se. against large groups of rival males that attempted to participate in spawnings. to address the question of why territoriality declined and female spawning rate increased at the highest male densities, a separate genetic study was conducted using ﬁn tissue collected during the density experiment. see reichard et al. (2004b) for materials and methods. paternity analysis established that the proportion of offspring sired by territorial males decreased with an increase in total male density (fig. 4). the proportion of embryos sired by an individual sneaker male was signiﬁcantly higher at high total, but not high local male density. territori- ality conferred a higher reproductive success than sneaking when total or local male density was low, but at high local and total density territorial males had the 142 l  e a m d e v r e s b o 125 100 75 50 25 ) % ( s s e c c u s e v i t c u d o r p e r 0 local total * * * ns low high low high low high male density fig. 4. mean observed relative reproductive success of territorial (white) and sneaker (black) males among four male density treatments in the pool experiment. asterisk indicates statistical differences between alternative behaviours. error bars are 1 se. same reproductive success as sneakers, and at this point territoriality broke down. in these two studies, male–male interference com- petition signiﬁcantly reduced bitterling spawning rates, and this effect was detectable at the population level. however, it does not necessarily follow that this effect has the potential to alter recruitment patterns. the failure of female bitterling to spawn may have been temporary, and females with eggs in their ovaries might have been able to spawn eventually, though with the result that the spawning season was more protrac- ted. however, female ﬁsh that fail to spawn tend to reabsorb their eggs through the process of ovarian atresia (tyler & sumpter 1996; wootton 1998). for example, female seabream (sparus aurata) showed high levels of atresia within 1 week of isolation from males (meiri et al. 2002), and in rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) up to 50% of the eggs in the ovaries of some females may undergo atresia (tyler et al. 1990). thus, the repeated failure to spawn as a result of male–male competition could reduce total population egg production for a spawning season. because bitterling embryo mortality inside mussels is density dependent (smith et al. 2000a), a decrease in spawning rate may result in an improved survival of spawned eggs in mussels, with a positive effect on population size. consequently, although male compe- tition over spawnings was shown to signiﬁcantly reduce spawning rates, the long-term effect on popu- lation size is ambiguous and warrants further inves- tigation. competition among juveniles douglas (2003) conducted ﬁeld surveys, ﬁeld experi- ments and ﬁeld-based behavioural observations to identify among density-dependent interactions juvenile bitterling that might have an impact at the population level. smith et al. (2000a) demonstrated that during their ﬁrst summer the availability of shallow vegetated habitat, interacting with predatory perch abundance, was signiﬁcantly related to juvenile bitterling abundance, raising the prospect that juvenile bitterling use these areas as refuges from predators. smith et al. (2000a) also illustrated that both mortality and growth of juvenile bitterling were strongly density dependent during their ﬁrst summer and winter. further, both density-dependent growth and overwin- ter mortality had direct consequences for bitterling population size. douglas (2003) showed that juvenile bitterling used vegetated habitat in preference to [for details of materials and unvegetated habitat methods, see douglas (2003)]. as bitterling density increased, unvegetated habitat was used more fre- quently. juvenile bitterling inhabiting the vegetated margins of lakes were larger than juveniles in the unvegetated margins suggesting competitive exclusion of small juveniles from preferred habitat. examination of daily growth increments in the otoliths of juvenile bitterling revealed that this difference in size was not the result of differences in growth rate or size- dependent mortality associated with each habitat. rather, a difference in the age structure of juvenile bitterling in each habitat offered the most likely explanation, with a higher proportion of older juve- niles in the vegetated habitat (douglas 2003). in a ﬁeld experiment, juvenile bitterling were shown to display clear differences in individual feeding and agonistic behaviour that were habitat-, size- and density dependent. strong interference competition was observed between juvenile bitterling, with smaller juveniles suffering the highest rate of interference in vegetated habitat. smaller juveniles also suffered higher rates of aggression directed towards them by larger individuals, which was believed to reduce their feeding rate. interference competition in vegetated margins appeared to result in smaller juvenile bitter- ling being forced to forage in unvegetated areas, where the intensity of intraspeciﬁc competition was lower, but the risk of predation higher. in a second ﬁeld experiment, juvenile bitterling that were prone to both exploitative and interference competition were shown to suffer density-dependent growth and mortality as zooplanktons became deple- ted in experimental enclosures. mortalities recorded in the study were probably caused by starvation, and were found to be density dependent over the duration of the experiment. bitterling subjected only to inter- ference competition also exhibited density-dependent growth, but at a reduced level. the results of this study indicate that recruitment in bitterling is determined between larval emergence from their mussel host and autumn. mortality at this population consequences of behaviour in bitterling osr adult density 1. male-male competition mussel species 2. female oviposition decisions spawning emergence from mussel recruitment 3. agonistic behaviour juvenile density refuges fig. 5. this ﬁgure summarises the three stages during which behaviour has been identiﬁed as playing a role in the population dynamics of bitterling. stage was strongly density dependent, and arose either through starvation or predation, which were directly related to intraspeciﬁc competition among juveniles. the strength of density dependence was mediated by the availability of vegetated nursery areas. because events in early life history appear to be most important its behavioural in determining recruitment success, interactions at to be of most signiﬁcance for bitterling demography. behaviours we have identiﬁed that may play a role in the population dynamics of bitterling are summarised in fig. 5. this stage appear conclusions the european bitterling is a freshwater ﬁsh that lays its eggs in the gill chamber of freshwater mussels. this review identiﬁes the possible role of behaviour in population dynamics of this species. the identiﬁcation of population consequences of behaviour is an in attempts to unify ecology with important goal behaviour (hassell & may 1985; parker 1985; sutherland 1996). although bitterling have an unusual reproductive ecology, which makes them amenable to studies aimed at understanding links between spawning decisions 143 smith et al. and population dynamics, they are not unique in this respect. for example, many ﬁshes use discrete sites for spawning, and many are choosy with respect to oviposition decisions. european perch select substrates on which to deposit their eggs (gillet & dubois 1995), which may have consequences for embryo survival (smith et al. 2001b). alternative male mating tactics are diverse in ﬁshes (taborsky 1994), and may have implications for population-level processes in a range of ﬁsh species (avise et al. 2002). early life stages are probably crucial in determining year class strength in many ﬁsh species (wootton 1998), and behavioural interactions that underpin recruitment success are likely to have signiﬁcant population consequences. consequently, although bitterling have served as a model to understand how individual behaviours are the mechanisms that may ultimately shape population parameters, these are not the only species with which the links between behaviour and population dynamics can be investigated. another species that may represent a valuable model for investigating population consequences of behaviour is the threespine stickleback (gasterosteus aculeatus). sticklebacks are small ﬁshes that live in streams, ponds, lakes and coastal waters in the northern temperate zone. for more than 50 years, the threespine stickleback has been at the forefront of research in several areas of biology, most particularly as a model organism in ethology, behavioural ecology and evolutionary biology. the great value of the threespine stickleback lies in its distinctive and well- described behavioural repertoire (wootton 1976). sticklebacks are amenable to ﬁeld (le comber et al. 2003), population (wootton & smith 2000) and genetic (largiade`r et al. 2001) studies. another distinctive feature of this species is the rapid adaptive radiation among populations; it is a species complex of striking phenotypic diversity. researchers may be able to to exploit population differences in behaviour investigate the consequences of behaviour at the population level. an extension of the concept of linking behaviour to populations is to develop an understanding of con- nections among all levels of biological organisation, linking molecular and developmental processes with an organism’s physiology, behaviour, ecology and evolution. this more ambitious goal requires a model organism for which there is not only an understanding of the population consequences of behavioural deci- sions, but also of the links between genetic variation, gene expression, physiology and adaptive behaviour. few of the model organisms currently used in biology offer the opportunity to undertake such studies, though the zebraﬁsh (danio rerio) and the two ﬁshes, threespine stickleback (g. aculeatus), may prove worthy candidates. 144 further fruitful areas of research on european bitterling aimed at linking behaviour with population dynamics might address behavioural responses to the temporal and spatial distribution of receptive females in response to the availability of spawning sites. interspeciﬁc comparisons among the 40 or so bitter- ling species, predominantly found in east asia, could also prove illuminating (smith et al. 2004). acknowledgements our efforts to use bitterling to link behaviour with population dynamics arose from an idea originally proposed by john reynolds and bill sutherland. we are extremely grateful to trazar astley, neil clark, nick goodwin, marin greenwood, oliver jones, bill jordan, ladislav kaluzˇı´k, paulina kan- iewska, steve le comber, marketa ondracˇkova´, chris pat- eman-jones, vasˇek pra´sˇek, mirosław przybylski, rowena spence, mark warren and grzegorz zie˛ba for assistance with ﬁeldwork over the last 10 years of enjoyable and fruitful research on bitterling. we are also grateful for the constructive comments from becky fuller and an anonymous referee on an earlier version of our manuscript. references łomnicki, a. 1988. population ecology of individuals. prince- ton: princeton university press:223 pp. aldridge, d.c. 1999. development of european bitterling in the gills of freshwater mussels. journal of fish biology 54:138– 151. avise, j.c., jones, a.g., walker, d., dewoody, j.a. & collaborators 2002. genetic mating systems and reproductive natural histories of ﬁshes: lessons for ecology and evolution. annual reviews in genetics 36:19–45. le comber, s.c., faulkes, c.g., formosinho, j. & smith, c. 2003. response of territorial males to the threat of sneaking in the three-spined stickleback, gasterosteus aculeatus: a ﬁeld study. journal of zoology 261:15–20. douglas, a. 2003. population ecology and behaviour of juvenile bitterling (rhodeus sericeus, pallas). ph.d. thesis. london: queen mary college, university of london. 200 pp. ebling, f.j. & stoddart, d.m. 1978. population control by social behavior. new york: praeger:304 pp. emlen, s.t. 1976. lek organization and mating strategies in the bullfrog. behavioral ecology & sociobiology 1:283– 313. enders, m.m. 1993. the effect of male size and operational sex ratio on male mating success in the common spider mite tetranychus urticae koch (acari, tetranychidae). animal behaviour 46:835–846. gillet, c. & dubois, j.p. 1995. a survey of the spawning of perch (perca ﬂuviatilis), pike (esox lucius), and roach (rutilus rutilus), using artiﬁcial spawning substrates in lakes. hydrobiologia 300/301:409–415. hamilton, w.d. 1972. altruism and related phenomena, mainly in social insects. annual review of ecology & systematics 3:193–232. hassell, m.p. & may, r.m. 1985. from individual behaviour to population dynamics. in: sibly, r.m. & smith, r.h., eds. behavioural ecology: ecological consequences of adaptive behaviour. oxford: blackwell, pp. 3–32. jirotkul, m. 1999. population density inﬂuences male-male competition in guppies. animal behaviour 58:1169–1175. kvarnemo, c. & ahnesjo¨, i. 2002. operational sex ratios and mating competition. i.c.w., ed. sex ratios: concepts and research methods. cambridge: cambridge university press, pp. 366–382. in: hardy, largiade`r, c.r., fries, v., bakker, t.c.m. 2001. genetic analysis of sneaking and egg-thievery in a natural population of the three-spined stickleback (gasterosteus aculeatus l.). heredity 86:459–468. meiri, i., gothilf, y., zohar, y. & elizur, a. 2002. physiological changes in the spawning gilthead bream sparus aurata succeeding the removal of males. journal of experimental zoology 292:555–564. parker, g.a. 1985. population consequences of evolutionary stable strategies. in: sibly, r.m. & smith, r.h., eds. behavioural ecology: ecological consequences of adaptive behaviour. oxford: blackwell, pp. 33–58. przybylski, m. & zie˛ba, g. 2000. microhabitat preferences of european bitterling, rhodeus sericeus in the drzewiczka river (pilica basin). polish archives of hydrobiology 47:99– 114. reichard, m., jurajda, p., sˇ imkova´, m. & mateˇjusova´, i. 2002. size-related habitat use by bitterling (rhodeus sericeus) in a regulated lowland river. ecology of freshwater fish 11:112– 122. reichard, m., smith, c. & jordan, w.c. 2004a. genetic evidence reveals density-dependent mediated success of alternative mating tactics in the european bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). molecular ecology 13:1569–1578. reichard, m., jurajda, p. & smith, c. 2004b. male–male interference competition decreases spawning rate in the european bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). behavioral ecology & sociobiology 56:34–41. smith, r.h. & sibly, r. 1985. behavioural ecology and population dynamics: towards a synthesis. in: sibly, r.m. & smith, r.h., eds. behavioural ecology: ecological conse- quences of adaptive behaviour. oxford: blackwell, pp. 577– 591. smith, c., reynolds, j.d. & sutherland, w.j. 2000a. the population consequences of reproductive decisions. proceed- population consequences of behaviour in bitterling ings of the royal society of london, series b 267:1327– 1334. smith, c., reynolds, j.d., sutherland, w.j. & jurajda, p. 2000b. adaptive host choice and avoidance of superparasit- ism in the spawning decisions of bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). behavioral ecology & sociobiology 48:29–35. smith, c., rippon, k., douglas, a. & jurajda, p. 2001a. a proximate cue for oviposition site choice in the bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). freshwater biology 46:903–911. smith, c., douglas, a. & jurajda, p. 2001b. oviposition site selection and embryo mortality in perch. journal of fish biology 58:880–882. smith, c., douglas, a. & jurajda, p. 2002. sexual conﬂict, sexual selection, and sperm competition in the spawning decisions of bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). behavioral ecology & sociobiology 51:433–439. smith, c., reichard, m. & jurajda, p. 2003. assessment of sperm competition by bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). beha- vioral ecology & sociobiology 53:206–213. smith, c., reichard, m., jurajda, p. & przybylski, m. 2004. the reproductive ecology of the european bitterling (rhodeus sericeus). journal of zoology 262:107–124. sutherland, w.j. 1996. from individual behaviour to population ecology. oxford: oxford university press:213 pp. taborsky, m. 1994. sneakers, satellites and helpers – parasitic and cooperative behaviour in ﬁsh reproduction. advances in the study of behavior 23:1–100. tyler, c.r. & sumpter, j.p. 1996. oocyte growth and in teleosts. reviews in fish biology and development fisheries 6:287–318. tyler, c.r., sumpter, j.p. & witthames, p.r. 1990. the dynamics of oocytes growth during vitellogenesis in the rainbow trout, salmo gairdneri. biology of reproduction 43:202–209. williams, g.c. 1975. sex and evolution. princeton: princeton university press:210 pp. wootton, r.j. 1976. the biology of the sticklebacks. london: academic press:387 pp. wootton, r.j. 1998. ecology of teleost ﬁshes. dordrecht: kluwer academic publisher:386 pp. wootton, r.j. & smith, c. 2000. long-term study of a short- the demography of gasterosteus aculeatus. lived ﬁsh: behaviour 137:981–997. 145  