ecology of freshwater fish 2005: 14: 319–330 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved copyright ó blackwell munksgaard 2005 ecology of freshwater fish the relationship of environmental factors to spatial and temporal variation of ﬁsh assemblages in a ﬂoodplain river in texas, usa li ry, gelwick fp. the relationship of environmental factors to spatial and temporal variation of ﬁsh assemblages in a ﬂoodplain river in texas, usa. ecology of freshwater fish 2005: 14: 319–330. ó blackwell munksgaard, 2005 r. y. li, f. p. gelwick department of wildlife and fisheries sciences, texas a&m university, college station, tx, usa abstract – spatial and temporal variation of species–environment relationships were evaluated for shallow-margin and deep-water ﬁsh assemblages in the brazos river, a large ﬂoodplain river in texas, usa. total variation among the deep-water assemblages (11 species, 86% turnover across gill net samples) was greater than for shallow-margins (38 species, 64% turnover across seine samples). for both shallow-margin and deep-water assemblages, variation was greater among sites than between winter and summer seasons. shallow-margin assemblage structure was related to depth, velocity and substrate, whereas for deep-water assemblages river discharge, temperature and velocity were important. season itself accounted for little of the variation among either shallow (6.7%) or deep-water (2.3%) assemblages. overall temporal patterns of shallow-margin samples appeared to show responses to juvenile recruitment, spates and migration of coastal ﬁshes, whereas for deep-water samples, patterns related to use of reproductive habitats, juvenile recruitment and seasonal activity levels. brazos river assemblages were less variable overall in comparison with studies along similar length of reach in headwater streams and wadeable rivers. the residual variation in species distribution (54% for shallow-margin and 67% for deepwater) that was not explained by instream variables and season suggests a greater inﬂuence of biotic interactions in rivers, particularly those across the spatially dynamic interface of main channel habitats and shallow river margins. key words: large ﬂoodplain river; shallow margin; deepwater; canonical correspondence analysis; variance partitioning f. p. gelwick, department of wildlife and fish- eries sciences, texas a&m university, 210 nagle hall, college station, tx 77843-2258, usa; e-mail: fgelwick@tamu.edu accepted for publication may 6, 2005 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´s del texto principal de este artı´culo. introduction despite the spatial heterogeneity and dynamism of large rivers, few studies have explored the variability of their ﬁsh assemblages. our understanding of lotic-ﬁsh assemblages is largely based on studies of headwater streams and wadeable rivers. spatial variation among stream ﬁsh assemblages has been strongly linked to hydraulic mesohabitat characteristics (e.g., water depth, current velocity and substrate; angermeier & karr 1983) and structural complexity (e.g., large woody debris and macrophytes; schlosser 1982; lobb & orth 1991). temporal variation among stream-ﬁsh assemblages has been related to predictability and ﬂuctuation in discharge and physicochemical condi- tions (matthews 1987; gelwick 1990; gido et al. 1997). theoretically, stochastic and frequent ﬂuctua- tions of stream conditions deter assemblages from attaining an equilibrium structure. therefore, biotic processes should have a smaller relative inﬂuence on assemblage structure than should abiotic processes (grossman et al. 1982, 1998; schlosser 1987). across similar temporal and spatial scales, environ- mental conditions are less variable in large rivers than doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2005.00106.x 319 li & gelwick in streams, and therefore river ﬁsh assemblages should reﬂect more equitable structuring by biotic and abiotic factors (schlosser 1987; paller 1994). in tropical ﬂoodplain rivers, the relative inﬂuence on ﬁshes of biotic versus abiotic factors is strongly correlated with the seasonal ﬂood-pulse. during ﬂoods, the range of aquatic habitats expands and ﬁshes are randomly distributed across the ﬂoodplain (saint-paul et al. 2000). then as ﬂoodwaters recede, the range of aquatic habitats contracts to those of ﬂoodplain lakes and the river channel in which competition and predation are the primary determinants of assemblage structure (rodriguez & lewis 1994). despite such contrasting environmental could be due and hydrological conditions distinguishing large rivers from small streams (schlosser 1987; poff & allan 1995), inferences about spatial and temporal pat- terns, and processes that structure temperate river ﬁsh assemblages are adopted primarily from studies of headwater streams and wadeable rivers (stalnaker et al. 1989). however, within a comparable length of reach, habitat use by ﬁshes can differ substan- tially, even among different-sized streams (lobb & orth 1991). differences to the commonly reported pattern of increase in heterogen- eity within hydraulic mesohabitats with increase in stream size. for example, change in environmental conditions from stream margin to interior habitats within a rifﬂe or pool in a large stream, often are similar to changes across those mesohabitats in a small stream (lobb & orth 1991). greater within- habitat variation could enhance overall diversity of river assemblages by supporting additional specialist species that partition the greater area and hetero- geneity of habitat-related resources. furthermore, smaller individuals could ﬁnd refuge from large- bodied predatory ﬁshes by moving among shallow margin habitats and woody debris that becomes available across the dynamic range of discharge and depth in ﬂoodplain river systems. therefore, in comparison with stream assemblages along a similar length of large-river ﬁshes should exhibit greater spatial variation within and among meso- habitats, but less temporal variation. reach, to extend our understanding of temperate, large- river assemblages, we assessed the distribution of ﬁshes in a downstream unregulated portion of the brazos river in texas, usa. our objectives were to: (1) quantify and compare spatial and temporal variation among assemblages in shallow-margin ver- sus deep-water habitats, (2) identify species–environ- ment relationships that are likely to explain the structure of assemblages within these habitats and (3) quantify and compare assemblage structure that is related to seasonal versus nonseasonal components of environmental variation. 320 study reach the lower brazos river is a warm water, meandering, ﬂoodplain river, which empties into the gulf of mexico. several ﬂood control dams and water supply reservoirs are located along the upper reaches of the basin, but the lower brazos river remains one of few large-river systems in the usa having a relatively unregulated ﬂow regime. sites were selected along a representative 10-km study reach between the towns of sealy and simonton, tx (29°40¢n, 96°01¢w). nine shallow (<1 m) sites represented the relative occur- rence of river-margin mesohabitat types in the lower brazos river. they included one rifﬂe, two runs, four pools, one embayment and the tributary conﬂuence of allens creek. eight representative deep (>1 m) sites were similarly selected along the main channel and included three pools, two embayments, two runs and the allens creek conﬂuence. materials and methods six collection periods were distributed from september 2001 to august 2002, targeting discharges within the 15th, 30th and 50th percentile ﬂows of the summer (april–october) and winter (november–march) sea- sons. these ranges were calculated using the mean daily discharge of the previous 60 years of record collected by the u.s. geological service’s (usgs) brazos river gage station at simonton, tx. each shallow-margin site was subsampled at three locations using a bag seine (5 m long · 1.2 m · 1.2 m, 4.5 mm mesh) hauled along 15 m of shoreline. each deep-water site was sampled using an experimental monoﬁlament gillnet (38.1 m · 1.8 m) comprised ﬁve panels (one each of 2.5, 3.8, 5.1, 6.3 and 7.6 cm bar mesh). each was typically set at a 45° angle to the river-current and allowed to ﬁsh overnight (approximately 16 h). state or federally listed rare, threatened or endangered species and large individuals of common species were recorded and returned alive to the river. other ﬁshes were killed in tricane (ms-222) and ﬁxed in 10% formalin. fishes were identiﬁed using regional keys (robison & buchanan 1988; hubbs et al. 1991; ross 2001) and voucher specimens of representative sizes for each species were catalogued into the texas cooperative wildlife collections of texas a&m university. physicochemical parameters were measured at each site immediately after ﬁsh collections. temperature )1) and (°c), dissolved oxygen concentration (mgæl )1) were measured in the centre of conductivity (lsæcm each sampled area using a yellow springs instruments multimeter (ysi-85; yellow springs, oh, usa). following vadas & orth (1998), mean water depth and current velocity for each shallow-margin site were calculated from measurements at three equidistant points along a diagonal bisecting each area sub- sampled. for deep-water sites, water depth and velocity were measured at vertical points along the net. water depths <150 cm were measured (1 cm) using a gradu- ated wading rod; depths >150 cm were measured (10 cm) using a speedtechò sonar depth meter (great falls, va, usa). current velocity was measured )1) at 0.6 of depth using a marshmcbirney (cmæs flowmate 2000 electromagnetic ﬂow meter (frederick, md, usa). dominant particle size of substrate along shallow-margin sites was classiﬁed as clay, silt, sand or gravel using a modiﬁed wentworth scale (rosgen 1996). additionally, overall hydrological condition of the river during each collection was characterised using )1) and river stage (either rising, mean discharge rate (læs falling or steady) recorded at the usgs gage station. preliminary analyses conﬁrmed better performance (greatest explanatory power) for unimodal methods (e.g., correspondence analysis) – most likely due to its emphasis on relative abundance, which accommodates data with many zeroes – when compared with linear methods (e.g., principal components) that emphasise absolute abundance (jongman et al. 1995). to quan- tify spatial and temporal variation of ﬁsh assemblages captured using our two different gear types, corres- pondence analyses (ca) were run separately on shallow-margin and deep-water data sets (canoco software program, v. 4.0). in ca, weighted averaging is used to maximise the covariance among species sample scores, from which one can infer environmen- tal gradients that could be related to species distribu- tions. an initial ca was run using detrending to quantify assemblage variation along gradients that were scaled as standardised deviations (sd) for each axis (e.g., 4 sd indicates 100% turnover in species composition). species abundances were log(x + 1) transformed and rare species were down-weighted to reduce the inﬂuence of those rarely collected or having highly skewed distributions. scores for samples and commonly collected species abundance >0.1%) were visualised in biplots for ca axes i and ii. to test signiﬁcance of variation in shallow-margin ﬁshes along the inferred environmental gradients (ca axes i and ii), sample scores (the dependent variables) were tested using repeated measures analysis of variance (rm-anova using spss v. 11.0 for win- dows). scores were log-transformed to approximate a normal distribution with uniform variance. spatial variation was tested as the among-site difference between lotic and lentic hydraulic habitat types (the between-subjects independent variable). ca scores for all lotic habitats (i.e., runs and rifﬂes) were compared with scores for all lentic habitats (i.e., pools, embay- ments and tributary conﬂuence). temporal variation (repeated, within-subjects factor) was tested among the (p < 0.05) six collection periods. for signiﬁcant (relative brazos river ﬁshes rm-anova test results, bonferroni post-hoc compar- ison tests were used to identify signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) pair-wise differences among factor levels. some deep-water samples had zero catch (see results). because no components of variance can be calculated for zero-catch samples, ca scores could not be calculated for them. therefore, the set of deep- water ca sample scores violated the balanced design required of rm-anova. as an alternative test, kend- all’s coefﬁcient of rank concordance (kendall’s w) was run, ﬁrst with and then without zero-catch samples included (spss v. 11.0 for windows). species abundance tested (p < 0.05) for temporal concordance among the six collection periods and spatial concordance across each of three spatial groups (i.e., all individual sites, lotic vs. lentic habitats and tributary conﬂuence vs. brazos river sites). samples were ranks within relationships we compared the inferred gradients from ca to species–environment identiﬁed using canonical correspondence analysis (cca), which also were run separately for shallow-margin and deep- water assemblages using canoco software. cca is a direct gradient analysis that combines the weighted averaging technique of ca with multiple regression to determine a linear combination of explanatory varia- bles that maximises the dispersion of species relative abundances among samples (jongman et al. 1995). species accounting for <0.1% of the total catch were omitted from cca because rare species typically have a minor inﬂuence on results of multivariate statistics and can be perceived as outliers in ordinations (gauch 1982). species abundances were log(x + 1) trans- formed to normalise their distributions. to quantify unique variation in species distributions that was independent of (uncorrelated with) season, a partial cca was run with summer and winter as covariables – removing variation caused by season, as well as variation in remaining variables that was collinear with season. conversely, to quantify unique variation caused by season, a separate partial cca was run with environmental variables as covariables. for each shallow-margin partial cca, monte carlo randomi- sations (199 permutations) in a split-plot design were run to test signiﬁcance (p < 0.05) of the directly identiﬁed environmental gradient represented by the ﬁrst canonical axis and also by that for all canonical axes combined. variables having high multicollinear- ity (herein deﬁned as variance inﬂation factor >3) were removed before testing in order to avoid inﬂated signiﬁcance values. elimination of samples having zero catch (as noted above) again resulted in an unbalanced design for the deep-water data set, which prevented use of split-plot signiﬁcance tests in cca. instead, mantel multivariate correlations were used to test spatial and temporal 321 li & gelwick correlations patterns of correlation among species ranked abun- dances across samples (i.e., the square species matrix) versus among explanatory variables across those samples (i.e., the square environmental matrix). multivariate correlations were calculated between the triangular dissimilarity matrices calcula- ted from each original square matrix. tests compared a z-statistic for randomly permuted data with that of the original data. to determine the effect of zero-catch samples on our results, tests were ﬁrst run (pcord for windows ver. 4.0) for species and environmental matrices using all samples and then run for matrices with zero-catch samples omitted. species abundances were log(x + 1) transformed. euclidean distance was the dissimilarity measure most compatible for com- paring the two data types (species and environmental). monte carlo randomisations (1000 permutations) were used to test signiﬁcance (p < 0.05) of matrix correlations. to identify the combination of environ- mental variables that best distinguished samples with zero-catch from all other samples, a canonical variates analysis (cva) was run (canoco). this allowed a comparison of results from both direct and indirect analyses (cva, cca and mantel tests) of species– environment relationships, and to identify and test for signiﬁcance of environmental factors that might have inﬂuenced the zero-catch samples and thereby, inﬂu- enced our results. results 118,507, 74,275, )1 for and were the usgs discharge values used in analyses for summer 50th, 30th and 15th percentile collection )1, periods were 114,486, 41,824 and 25,089 læs respectively, and 63,090 læs the respective winter percentiles. a total of 28,469 individuals (41 species and 13 families) were collected across 54 samples. of those, most (28,210 individuals; 38 species and 12 families) were from shallow river margins, and two cyprinid species comprised 66% (red shiner cyprinella lutren- sis) and 16% (bullhead minnow pimephales vigilax) of that total. the remaining common river-margin species were (in descending order of abundance) silverband shiner notropis shumardi, mosquitoﬁsh gambusia afﬁnis, ghost striped mullet mugil cephalus, threadﬁn shad dorosoma petenense, speckled chub macrhybopsis aestivalis, gizzard shad dorosoma cepedianum, inland silverside menidia beryllina and silver chub macrhybopsis storeriana. shiner notropis buchanani, in deep-water sites, logistical difﬁculties of samp- ling occurred during the initial (summer 50th percent- ile discharge) collection period, which caused those eight samples to be eliminated. during the ﬁve remaining collection periods, 259 individuals (11 322 species and six families) were collected, but zero- catch occurred in 10 of those 40 samples. longnose gar lepisosteus osseus comprised 59% of the catch. other commonly collected species were (in descend- ing order of abundance) spotted gar lepisosteus oculatus, gizzard shad, river carpsucker carpioides carpio, blue catﬁsh ictalurus furcatus, smallmouth buffalo ictiobus bubalus, channel catﬁsh ictalurus punctatus, freshwater drum aplodinotus grunniens, striped mullet and skipjack herring alosa chrysoch- loris. total along axis and axis among sample scores d.f. ¼ 5, p < 0.001) in the ca for the 58 shallow river-margin samples across all six collection periods, inertia (the eigenvalue quantifying total variation among the 11 common species) was 1.002. axis i spanned 1.84 sd units (64% turnover in species composition). the ca results are plotted for axes i and ii (fig. 1), which together explained 33.7% of total species distribution among shallow-margin samples. rm-anova detected differences i (f ¼ 8.328, ii (f ¼ 5.061, d.f. ¼ 5, p ¼ 0.001). bonferroni post- hoc tests of axis i scores identiﬁed summer 50th percentile samples as different from both winter 15th and winter 50th percentile samples (i.e., right vs. left in fig. 1a). for axis ii, summer 30th percentile samples differed from winter 15th percentile samples (i.e., top vs. bottom in fig. 1a). summer 50th percentile samples were distinguished by larger relat- ive abundances of – and therefore stronger associa- tions with – gizzard shad, threadﬁn shad, speckled chub and silver chub. summer 30th percentile samples shared two of those four species – threadﬁn shad and speckled chub. by contrast, both winter 15th and winter 50th percentile samples were associated with four cyprinid species: red shiner, bullhead minnow, silverband shiner and ghost shiner. winter 50th percentile samples were further distinguished by association with striped mullet. rm-anova did not detect a difference between lotic versus lentic shallow river-margin assemblages (fig. 1b) along either axis (axis i: f ¼ 0.439, d.f. ¼ 1, p ¼ 0.529; axis ii: f ¼ 0.021, d.f. ¼ 1, p ¼ 0.889). in the ca of the 10 common species in the deep- water assemblage (30 nonzero samples across ﬁve collection periods), total inertia was 1.907 and axis i spanned 3.0 sd units (86% turnover in species composition). the ﬁrst two ca axes explained 41.1% of species distribution among deep-water sites (fig. 2). overall species ranks across samples were not changed by inclusion of zero-catch samples, thus, concordance test results were identical whether or not zero-catch samples were included. kendall’s w across the ﬁve collection periods (i.e., with summer 50th percentile samples omitted) showed that species ranks were concordant (w ¼ 0.605, d.f. ¼ 10, p ¼ 0.001), brazos river ﬁshes fig. 1. correspondence analysis (ca) plots of shallow river- margin ﬁsh assemblages in the lower brazos river, tx. polygons indicate sample scores grouped by (a) combinations of season and percentile for discharge rate, identiﬁed as different in post-hoc rm-anova tests and (b) hydraulic habitat type (note: rm-anova tests showed no signiﬁcant difference). triangles represent scores of common species and circles represent sample scores. species labels are abbreviations using the ﬁrst three letters of the scientiﬁc names. arrows and coordinates identify species centroids outside sample polygons that were omitted to more clearly plot relation- ships among samples. fig. 2. correspondence analysis (ca) plots of deep-water ﬁsh assemblages in the lower brazos river, tx. polygons indicate samples grouped by (a) season and discharge rate and (b) hydraulic habitat type, identiﬁed as not signiﬁcantly concordant in kendall’s w tests of species ranked abundances. triangles represent centroids for common species and circles represent sample scores. species labels are abbreviations using the ﬁrst three letters of the scientiﬁc names. arrows and coordinates identify species centroids outside sample polygons that were omitted to more clearly plot relation- ships among samples. 323 li & gelwick not concordant (w ¼ 0.742, as were ranks across the three winter collections (w ¼ 0.756, d.f. ¼ 10, p ¼ 0.012). however, ranks d.f. ¼ 10, were p ¼ 0.138) between the summer 15th and summer 30th percentile samples (fig. 2a). species ranks were concordant (w ¼ 0517, d.f. ¼ 10, p < 0.001) across all eight sites (fig. 2b), but were not concordant (w ¼ 0.813, between d.f. ¼ 10, p ¼ 0.092), nor between allens creek (w ¼ 0.833, versus d.f. ¼ 10, p ¼ 0.082). all brazos river samples sites lentic versus lotic the cca for shallow river margins showed a total inertia of 0.713, and cca axes i and ii together explained 31.2% of the total variation in distribution among samples of the 11 common species (fig. 3). the species associations and amount of explained variation were similar to those in the ca (fig. 1). the cca showed that summer, water depth and current velocity were signiﬁcantly related to species variation along axis i; along axis ii variation was related to summer, the tributary conﬂuence and silt substrate. fig. 3. canonical correspondence analysis (cca) plot for ﬁsh species sampled in river margins along the lower brazos river, tx. triangles represent species centroids; circles represent nominal explanatory variables; arrows directed away from the origin represent vectors for continuous explanatory variables. additional arrows indicate labels for species or nominal variables spaced near the origin. explanatory variables signiﬁcantly related to the ﬁrst two axes (t-values ‡|2.1|) are in bold font. length and direction of vectors indicate the range and direction of positively increasing variation; more acute angles between vectors and a canonical axis indicates their stronger correlation. species centroids plotted closer to the head of an arrow indicate species whose abundances were more strongly correlated with more extreme values of that variable, compared to species whose centroids are near the origin. species labels are in italics and abbreviated as the ﬁrst three letters of the scientiﬁc names. 324 near the origin of the plot (fig. 3) are centroids for six cyprinid species: bullhead minnow, silverband shiner, ghost shiner, red shiner, speckled chub and silver chub. this position can indicate either weak associ- ation of these species with the environmental varia- bles, or their strong association with intermediate values of the variables. these species were collected across a wide range of environmental conditions and make up a large proportion of the individuals sampled. therefore, these species were interpreted as weakly associated with these variables, which probably accounts for the rather small quantity of explained variance in species distribution. gizzard shad and inland silverside were associated with silt substrate, higher temperature and the tributary conﬂuence. threadﬁn shad and western mosquitoﬁsh were also associated with higher temperature. striped mullet was associated with higher discharge and winter collections. despite the range of values measured )1), conductivity for dissolved oxygen (5–13 mgæl ()5– (11–1123 lsæcm current )1), none were strongly associated with distri- 66 cmæs bution of shallow river-margin species on the ﬁrst two major axes. velocity )1) and in the partial cca of shallow river-margin samples that included summer and winter as covariables – thereby removing both variation caused by season and any collinear (shared) variation between season and other explanatory variables – 16 variables explained 32.8% of the remaining variation in species distribu- tion. monte carlo randomisations indicated signiﬁcant relationships between species distribution and these 16 variables along axis i, as well as all canonical axes combined. with the 16 environmental variables inclu- ded as covariables (removing variation due to these and their shared variation with season), summer and winter uniquely explained 6.7% of the remaining variation in species distributions. monte carlo ran- domisations indicated a relationship between species distributions and season when all canonical axes were combined, but not for axis i alone. thus, no single gradient distinguished seasonal distribution of species among these shallow river-margin samples. an addi- tional 6.7% of the variation in species distributions was equally explained by either season or the meas- ured environmental variables, thereby leaving 53.8% as unexplained in shallow-margin assemblages. in the cca of deep-water samples, total inertia was 1.886 and cca axes i and ii together explained 20.4% of the total species variation. this variation was about half the magnitude of that seen in the ca (fig. 2), but as seen for the analysis of shallow-margin ﬁshes, similar species associations occurred along the major gradients in both the ca and cca. summer collec- tions, discharge rate and temperature distinguished species distribution on axes i and ii (fig. 4). skipjack brazos river ﬁshes when correlations between species and explanatory environmental matrices for all deep-water samples (including zero-catch samples) were analysed using mantel tests, no signiﬁcant correlation was detected, neither between matrices for species and matrices for environmental variables (r ¼ 0.0693, p ¼ 0.192), nor between matrices for species and matrices for season (r ¼ 0.0717, p ¼ 0.151). however, both tests indica- ted stronger correlations between species and explan- atory variables when zero-catch samples were omitted r ¼ 0.0827, p ¼ 0.188; (environmental variables: season: r ¼ 0.1313, p ¼ 0.098) the cva indicated current velocity as the only environmental variable that signiﬁcantly distinguished zero-catch samples, which had higher velocities, from lower-velocity samples that contained ﬁsh. discussion because of the inﬂuence that hydrological variability has on ﬁshes (poff & allan 1995) and the contrast in habitat characteristics between streams and rivers (lobb & orth 1991), we expected river ﬁsh assemblages to be more spatially variable (among our mesohabitats) and less temporally variable than generally reported for ﬁsh assemblages in small streams. two oft-cited studies of headwater streams and wadeable rivers (gorman & karr 1978; schlosser 1982) documented spatial variability (i.e., 63–93% similarity) in species composition and seasonal variability (i.e., 33–68% similarity) in species com- position for ﬁsh assemblages ranging from 5 to 10 common species along stream lengths comparable with the 10 km reach in our study. brazos river assemblages showed a comparable range of total variation; but the magnitude of explained variation due to spatial and seasonal components was smaller. shallow river-margin assemblages (38 total species, 11 common species) changed 64% across the longest ca gradient, and 32.8% of the total species distri- bution was explained by spatial variation in factors commonly reported as to stream ﬁsh distributions (i.e., water depth, velocity, substrate and the positioning of sites at the tributary conﬂu- ence), whereas only 6.7% was related to seasonal changes. total variation among the 10 common species was greater for the deep-water assemblage than for the shallow river-margin assemblage, but the magnitude of variation explained by spatial and temporal variables was lower; 27.1% was related to nonseasonal variation in discharge and temperature and 2.3% to season. however, the similarity in species associations depicted by the major axes in both the direct and indirect gradient analyses sug- gested that explanatory variables described the dom- inant spatial and temporal patterns. important 325 fig. 4. canonical correspondence analysis (cca) plot of results for ﬁsh assemblages sampled in deepwaters along the lower brazos river, tx. triangles and italics represent species centroids; circles represent nominal explanatory variables; arrows represent continu- ous explanatory variables. signiﬁcant explanatory variables signi- ﬁcantly related to the ﬁrst two axes (t-values ‡|2.1|) are in bold font. length and direction of arrows indicate the range and direction of positively increasing variation; more acute angles between vectors and a canonical axis indicate their stronger correlation. species centroids plotted closer to the head of an arrow indicate species whose abundances were more strongly correlated with higher values for that variable than species whose centroids are near the origin. species labels are in italics and abbreviated using the ﬁrst three letters of the scientiﬁc names. herring was associated with higher temperature and freshwater drum was associated with summer (lower right quadrant of fig. 4). river carpsucker and blue catﬁsh were associated with backwater habitat. in contrast to longnose gar, spotted gar was associated with faster current velocity and more stable discharge conditions. gizzard shad and striped mullet were associated with winter collections, the tributary con- ﬂuence and higher discharges. in the partial cca, of deep-water samples with summer and winter included as covariables, 10 environmental variables combined to uniquely explain 27.1% of the variation in species distributions across deep-water samples. by contrast, summer and winter uniquely explained 2.3% of the variation in species distributions. an additional 3.0% of the variation in species distributions could be equally explained by either of these variable groups, leaving 67% unex- plained variation in deep-water assemblages. velocity did not show a strong correlation with species distributions in cca, but data across the range of variation in velocity were truncated when the zero- catch samples had to be excluded from ordinations. li & gelwick contradictions between our results and other studies of large ﬂoodplain rivers might be attributable to differences in species composition and associated ecological and life-history characteristics. in the brazos river, temporal patterns of the assemblage suggested little change in species composition as it related to seasonal movement by ﬁshes among mes- ohabitats, but it did indicate that some species are probably vulnerable to displacement or mortality at high discharges during spates (harvey 1987). spring recruitment of juveniles might also have inﬂuenced assemblage composition, as reported for other tem- perate ﬂoodplain–river systems (turner et al. 1994; taylor et al. 1996). although length of individuals was not routinely measured in our study, increased abundance of red shiner, bullhead minnow, silverband shiner and ghost shiner during the winter 15th percentile collection included many ﬁsh within the young-of-the-year size class (<30 mm). moreover, their peak abundance followed the early spring reproductive period (robison & buchanan 1988). local assemblage movement by ﬁshes across large distances can inﬂuence temporal variation in abundance and seaso- nal migrations by some species can increase temporal variation of composition. for example, striped mullet is a schooling species that primarily inhabits coastal waters, but occasionally migrates upstream into freshwaters (hubbs et al. 1991). our captures of striped mullet were largely restricted to the winter 50th percentile collection and contributed to temporal variation of shallow and deep- water assemblages. in systems with ﬂuctuating envi- ronmental conditions, individuals of many species shift from less hospitable to more favourable habitats (angermeier & schlosser 1989). however, spates can induce mortality or displacement of certain species and size classes (ross & baker 1983; schlosser 1985; harvey 1987). strong associations of shad and chub species with our summer 50th and 30th percentile collections point to such hydraulic effects. immedi- ately prior to each of these collections, discharges >650,000 læs the gage station. gizzard and threadﬁn shad, which are abundant in oxbow lakes along the brazos river (winemiller et al. 2000), could have migrated or been transported into the river channel during these high-water periods. by contrast, speckled chub and silver chub are small, benthic minnows with fusiform bodies morphologi- cally adapted to withstand strong river currents. these latter species are also adept at seeking low-velocity, depositional microhabitats (e.g., in scoured sand pits or downstream of large cobble; f. gelwick, personal communication). thus, their higher relative abundance following spates was probably related to their low vulnerability to downstream displacement and lower mortality during high discharge conditions, when )1 were recorded at 326 compared with other small-bodied species in the assemblage. measured variability also depends on the spatial scale of observation. for instance, studies across broader regions are expected to include a wide range of environmental conditions and therefore greater spatial variation among assemblages (rahel & hubert 1991; waite & carpenter 2000). sites in our study were located along a 10-km reach in which physico- chemical conditions were largely consistent across sites within each collection period. additionally, our sampling in shallow margins limited maximum water depths to about 1.2 m and somewhat limited maxi- )1), thus limit- mum current velocity (rarely >30 cmæs ing the range of variation in these and other abiotic factors that were possibly correlated with species distribution. if the actual location of species along shallow river margins is considered to be extremely sensitive to river-stage ﬂux (bain et al. 1988). because river discharge rates are rarely stable over long time periods, river-margin ﬁshes must move in response to changing discharge, they are to remain in appropriate water depths. fishes must also shift their position to avoid strong current velocities and pisciv- orous ﬁshes associated with deeper waters, yet avoid becoming stranded in shallow habitats (schlosser 1985; bain et al. 1988). in variable environments, habitat generalists typically dominate the species composition (poff & allan 1995; jepsen 1997) and this probably contributed to the spatial homogeneity of shallow river-margin assemblages in the lower brazos river. for instance, red shiners accounted for two- thirds of our catch in shallow river margins. red shiner is a habitat generalist and tolerates a wide range of environmental conditions (marsh-matthews & mat- thews 2000). additionally, they quickly reach sexual maturity and are capable of spawning several times within a year, facilitating their rapid recruitment and population growth (gido et al. 1997). we did not routinely classify ﬁshes according to life stage during our study. however, ontogenetic shifts in habitat use (polis 1984) are commonly observed for several species that we sampled. such shifts can provide insight into patterns of spatial and temporal variability otherwise undetected by assessments based only on taxonomic composition (e.g., gelwick 1990; lobb & orth 1991; aadland 1993). incorporating ontogenetic shifts in habitat use would be particularly relevant when identifying spatial patterns related to potential nursery and juvenile habitats in shallow river margins and tributary conﬂuences (gorman 1986). in contrast to ﬁshes of the shallow river margin, spatial and temporal patterns were more apparent in the deep-water assemblage. analogous to the separ- ation between rifﬂe and pool assemblages typical of most streams (taylor 2000), deep-water ﬁshes of the lower brazos river were spatially segregated into lentic and lotic assemblages. in large rivers, faster currents and shallower depths are associated with lotic habitats and are generally less favourable conditions for (matthews et al. 1994). conversely, large-bodied species often congregate in slow, deep-water pools where environmental condi- tions are buffered from extreme ﬂuctuations (aadland 1993). large-bodied species tributaries the spatial differences between assemblages of the allens creek conﬂuence and those of the brazos river could be attributed to several factors. the conﬂuence of adventitious represents a transition between headwater streams and the main river chan- nel. therefore, conﬂuence assemblages usually con- tain both smaller-bodied stream species (e.g., minnows and live bearers) and larger-bodied riverine species (e.g., gars, buffalo ﬁshes and bullhead catﬁsh). migration and transitory movements of stream and river ﬁshes across the conﬂuence could have further contributed to assemblage differences between the allens creek conﬂuence and brazos river sites. river-ﬁsh migrations into adventitious tributaries are strongly correlated with water temperature and depth at the conﬂuence (braaten & guy 1999). in the brazos river, sediments associated with water level ﬂuctuations affected water depth at the conﬂuence site. during the winter 15th and 50th percentile collections, water depths were >1 m, enabling large-bodied ﬁshes to move between allens creek and the river. conversely, a sediment bar that had formed across the conﬂuence during the restricted water depth and remaining collections thereby also restricted movement of large-bodied ﬁshes between these habitats. the deposition and erosion of the conﬂuence of adventitious tributaries can also produce backwaters that function as habitats for reproduction and further contribute to assemblage differences between conﬂuence and mainstem river habitats (brown & coon 1994; taylor et al. 1996). the ‘low ﬂow recruitment hypothesis’ suggests that river-channel backwaters are important reproductive and nursery habitats for ﬁshes in lowland rivers that lack a regular and predictable ﬂood-pulse (humphries et al. 1999). accordingly, ﬁsh spawn during low discharge periods enabling their larvae to exploit high concentrations of zooplankton accumulating in other- wise ﬁshless backwaters. although the discharge regime of the lower brazos river is largely unregu- lated, actual ﬂooding is rare and irregular (usgs gage data). longnose gar was strongly associated with the allens creek conﬂuence during the winter 15th and 50th percentile collections. water temperatures at those times approached 19 °c, at which longnose gar initiate spawning (robison & buchanan 1988). brazos river ﬁshes captures of juvenile longnose gar in allens creek during our subsequent collections further substantiated the use of tributary conﬂuences as reproductive and nursery habitats for these brazos river ﬁshes. similar to tributary conﬂuences, embayments in the lower brazos river were used sequentially by reproductive adults and juvenile ﬁshes. adult long- nose gar were associated with embayment sites that contained woody snags or riprap debris, which can provide structure for the adhesive eggs and larvae of gars (robison & buchanan 1988). furthermore, woody structure enhances invertebrate-prey produc- tion (benke et al. 1985) and provides small ﬁshes with protection from predators and strong river currents (angermeier & karr 1983; madejczyk et al. 1998). several juvenile longnose gar were collected in and near these structurally complex embayments. temporal variation among deep-water assemblages was consistent with seasonal changes in activity patterns of ﬁsh. gillnet catch is highly selective for mobile species and active individuals (hubert 1996). the larger temporal variation that we observed among summer collections might have been due to increased ﬁsh movement and migration associated with sum- mertime activities. conversely, gillnet captures in winter typically decrease as ﬁsh activity declines with colder water temperatures. for example, large winter aggregations of ﬁsh have been reported to occur in the thermal refuge provided by deep backwaters (boden- steiner & lewis 1992). despite the larger nonseasonal association of the contribution species and environmental factors, of in-stream variables towards the explained variation in distribution of brazos river ﬁshes was low in comparison with their explanatory value reported for large streams (e.g., gorman & karr 1978). brazos shallow-margin assemblages were dominated by minnows, all of which had weak associations with measured environmental variables despite large ranges in values for those variables. with the exception of ghost shiner and silverband shiner, these ﬁshes are habitat generalists that tolerate a broad range of environmental conditions. by comparison, ghost shiner and silverband shiner are intolerant, schooling species and are generally restricted to large turbid systems (robison & buchanan 1988; ross 2001), such as the lower brazos river. the weak species– environment relationships were also consistent with effects of low spatial variation in environmental conditions. our study reach was entirely within the western gulf coastal plain physiographical region. latitude, drainage area, riparian land use and river gradient were similar among our sites, thus eliminating environmental variation associated with geographical and regional differences (angermeier & winston 1998; marsh-matthews & matthews 2000). 327 li & gelwick stream outﬂow from tributaries can dramatically disrupt physicochemical conditions along a river gradient (vannote et al. 1980). however, in allens creek (the only tributary conﬂuent with our study reach), most environmental conditions were similar to those in the river. thus, species–environment relation- ships in our study were largely characterised by temporal variations in environmental conditions that were consistent across samples within the collection period. threadﬁn shad and striped mullet were among the few species that showed strong associations with environmental variables. however, because their cat- ches were largely restricted to two collection periods, we could not conclude that their abundances were related to instream factors. rather, associations could also have been a consequence of spates or seasonal migration. zero-catch samples were not usable in cca, so variation in current velocity was truncated and did not indicate a strong association with the composition of the deep-water assemblage. however, those zero-catch samples were primarily distinguished from positive catches by faster current velocities. the higher meta- bolic cost to ﬁsh of rheotaxis in strong currents probably limited the distribution of some large-bodied individuals otherwise commonly captured in gillnets. alternatively, if ﬁshes used deep-water habitats along the thalweg where current velocities are slower (gordon et al. 1992), they were not likely to have encountered our gillnets – all set within 1 m of the water’s surface. when compared with the other environmental variables, season was weakly related to ﬁsh associa- tions in the lower brazos river. seasonal variability is generally reported to be a strong correlate for stream- ﬁsh assemblages, but this also depends on regional climate. in temperate regions of the northern usa discrete seasonal changes profoundly inﬂuence com- position of ﬁsh assemblages (jackson et al. 2001). at 29°40¢n, seasonality of conditions in the lower brazos river is not distinct. summers are warm and winters mild in this region, therefore the combined inﬂuence of local instream environmental variables outweighed that uniquely caused by season (e.g., ostrand & wilde 2002; herbert & gelwick 2003). overall, the lower variation in assemblage structure and weaker species–environment relationships ob- served during our study followed predictions from prevailing models developed from temperate head- water streams and wadeable rivers (schlosser 1987; matthews et al. 1988). in large rivers where environ- mental conditions across comparable spatial and temporal scales are more stable, the inﬂuence of biotic processes is predicted to outweigh that of abiotic factors in structuring ﬁsh assemblages (schlosser 1987). the role of biotic processes in determining 328 ﬁsh assemblage variation was not evaluated in this study. therefore, the relative contribution of biotic variables to the large variation in species distribution that was not correlated with environmental variables and season was not quantiﬁed. however, the charac- teristics of ﬁshes in the brazos river assemblage suggest some possible reasons for reduced seasonality when compared with that reported in other large rivers and small streams. river-margin assemblages were dominated by short-lived, tolerant or colonising spe- cies whose life history and behavioural responses are apparently structured by stochastic factors. in contrast, the main-channel assemblage reﬂected adaptations to a more predictable environment, in which ﬁsh species were larger-bodied, longer-lived and had singular periodic reproductive bouts. this suggests that the unexplained variation might include a larger role for biotic processes such as predation, especially as it relates to body size and the shifting interface between deeper main channel habitats and shallow river margins. such interactions would be better detected and best understood through studies that use experi- mental manipulations (arrington & winemiller 2005). resumen 1. evaluamos variaciones espaciales y temporales de las relaciones especies-ambiente en ensamblajes de peces en ma´rgenes someros y aguas profundas del rı´o brazos, un gran rı´o de inundacio´n de texas (usa). la variacio´ n total entre ensamblajes de aguas profundas (11 especies, 86% de renovacio´n entre muestreos de redes agalla) fue mayor que la de los ensamblajes de ma´rgenes someras (38 especies, 64% de renova- cio´n entre muestreos de arrastre). para ambos ensamblajes de ma´rgenes someras y aguas profundas, la variacio´n fue mayor entre localidades que entre estaciones del an˜o (invierno y verano). 2. la estructura de los ensamblajes de ma´rgenes someras estuvieron relacionados con la profundidad, la velocidad y el sustrato mientras que el caudal, la temperatura y la velocidad fueron importantes para los ensamblajes de aguas profundas. la estacio´ n del an˜o explico´ poca variacio´n entre los ensamblajes tanto los de ma´rgenes someras (6.7%) como los de aguas profundas (2.3%). los patrones temporales generales de los muestreos de ma´rgenes someras parecieron mostrar respuestas al reclutamiento de juveniles, a riadas y a la migracio´n de peces costeros mientras que los patrones de los muestreos de aguas profundas, parecieron relacionados al uso de ha´bitat reproduc- tivos, al reclutamiento de juveniles y a niveles de actividad estacional. 3. los ensamblajes del rı´o brazos fueron menos variables en comparacio´n a otros estudios realizados sobre longitudes similares de localidades en rı´os de cabecera y en rı´os vadeables. la variacio´n residual de la distribucio´n de especies (54% para los de ma´rgenes someras y 67% para aguas profundas) que no fue explicada por variables del rı´o y de la estacio´ n sugirio´ una mayor inﬂuencia de interacciones bio´ticas en rı´os, particular- mente de los de la interfase dina´mica espacial de los ha´bitats del canal central y los ma´rgenes someros del rı´o. acknowledgements christine burgess, adam cohen, mike kjelland, michael miller and virginia shervette assisted with ﬁeld collections. jeff coleman of big nuts tree farm provided and maintained access to the brazos river. kirk winemiller and anne chin reviewed previous versions of this manuscript. this study was funded by the texas water development board and by the texas water resources institute through a mill’s scholarship to r. li. references aadland, l.p. 1993. stream habitat types: their ﬁsh assemblages and relationship to ﬂow. north american journal of fisheries management 13: 790–806. angermeier, p.l. & karr, j.l. 1983. relationship between woody debris and ﬁsh habitat in a small warmwater stream. transactions of the american fisheries society 113: 716–726. angermeier, p.l. & schlosser, i.j. 1989. species-area relation- ships for stream ﬁshes. ecology 70: 1450–1462. angermeier, p.l. & winston, m.r. 1998. local vs. regional inﬂuences on local diversity of stream ﬁshes. ecology 71: 1483–1493. arrington, a.d. & winemiller, k.o. 2005. organization and maintenance of ﬁsh diversity in shallow waters of tropical ﬂoodplain rivers. in: welcomme, r.l. & petr, t., eds. proceedings of the second international symposium on the management of large rivers for ﬁsheries, vol. 2. phnom penh: mekong river commission, pp. 25–36. bain, m.b., finn, j.t. & book, h.e. 1988. streamﬂow regulation and ﬁsh community structure. ecology 69: 382–392. benke, a.c., henry, r.l., iii, gillespie, d.m. & hunter, r.j. 1985. importance of snag habitat for animal production in southeastern streams. fisheries 10: 8–13. bodensteiner, l.r. & lewis, w.m. 1992. role of temperature, dissolved oxygen, and backwaters in the winter survival of freshwater drum (aplodinotus grunniens) in the mississippi river. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 49: 173–184. braaten, p.j. & guy, c.s. 1999. relations between physio- chemical factors and abundance of ﬁshes in tributary conﬂuences of the lower channelized missouri river. transac- tions of the american fisheries society 128: 1213–1221. brown, d.j. & coon, t.g. 1994. abundance and assemblage structure of ﬁsh larvae in the lower missouri river and its tributaries. transactions of the american fisheries society 123: 718–732. gauch, h.g., jr. 1982. multivariate analysis in assemblage ecology. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press. 298 pp. gelwick, f.p. 1990. longitudinal and temporal comparisons of rifﬂe and pool ﬁsh assemblages in a northeastern oklahoma ozark stream. copeia 1990: 1072–1082. gido, k., propst, d.l. & molles, m.c., jr. 1997. spatial and temporal variation of ﬁsh communities in secondary channels of the san juan river, new mexico and utah, usa. environmental biology of fishes 49: 417–434. gordon, n.d., mcmahon, t.a. & finlayson, b.l. 1992. stream hydrology: an introduction for ecologists. west sussex, uk: john wiley & sons ltd. 552 pp. brazos river ﬁshes gorman, o.t. 1986. assemblage organization of stream ﬁshes: the effect of rivers on adventitious streams. the american naturalist 128: 611–616. gorman, o.t. & karr, j.r. 1978. habitat structure and stream ﬁsh communities. ecology 59: 507–515. grossman, g.d., moyle, p.b. & whitaker, j.o., jr. 1982. stochasticity in structural and functional characteristics of an indiana stream ﬁsh assemblage: a test of community theory. the american naturalist 120: 423–454. grossman, g.d., ratajczak, r.e., crawford, m. & freeman, m.c. 1998. assemblage organization in stream ﬁshes: effects of environmental variation and interspeciﬁc interactions. ecological monographs 68: 395–420. harvey, b.c. 1987. susceptibility of young-of-the-year ﬁshes to downstream displacement by ﬂooding. transactions of the american fisheries society 116: 851–855. herbert, m.e. & gelwick, f.p. 2003. spatial variation of headwater ﬁsh assemblages explained by hydrologic varia- bility and upstream effects of impoundment. copeia 2003: 273–284. hubbs, c., edwards, r.j. & garrett, g.p. 1991. an annotated checklist of the freshwater ﬁshes of texas, with keys to identiﬁ- cation of species. texas journal of sciences 43 (suppl.): 1–56. hubert, w.a. 1996. passive capture techniques. in: murphy, b.r. & willis, d.w., eds. fisheries techniques, 2nd edn. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 157–181. humphries, p., king, a.j. & koehn, j.d. 1999. fish, ﬂows, and ﬂood plains: links between freshwater ﬁshes and their environment in the murray-darling river system, australia. environmental biology of fishes 56: 129–151. jackson, d.a., peres-neto, p.r. & olden, j.d. 2001. what controls who is where in freshwater ﬁsh communities – the roles of biotic, abiotic, and spatial factors. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 58: 157–170. jepsen, d.b. 1997. fish species diversity in sand bank habitats of a neotropical river. environmental biology of fishes 49: 449–460. jongman, r.h.g., ter braak, c.j.f. & van tongeren, o.f.r. 1995. data analysis in assemblage and landscape ecology. cambridge, ma: cambridge university press. 321 pp. lobb, d.m., iii & orth, d.l. 1991. habitat use by an assemblage of ﬁsh in a large warmwater stream. transactions of the american fisheries society 120: 65–78. madejczyk, j.c., mundahl, n.d. & lehtinen, r.m. 1998. fish assemblages of natural and artiﬁcial habitats within the channel border of the upper mississippi river. the american midland naturalist 139: 296–310. marsh-matthews, e. & matthews, w.j. 2000. spatial variation in relative abundance of a widespread, numerically dominant ﬁsh species and its effect on ﬁsh assemblage structure. oecologia 125: 283–292. matthews, w.j. 1987. physicochemical tolerance and selectiv- ity of stream ﬁshes as related to their geographic ranges and local distributions. in: matthews, w.j. & heins, d.c., eds. community & evolutionary ecology of north american stream ﬁshes. norman, ok: university of oklahoma press, pp. 111–120. matthews, w.j., cashner, r.c. & gelwick, f.p. 1988. stability and persistence of ﬁsh faunas and communities in three midwestern streams. copeia 1988: 947–957. 329 li & gelwick matthews, w.j., harvey, b.c. & power, m.e. 1994. spatial and temporal patterns in the ﬁsh assemblages of individual pools in a midwestern stream (usa). environmental biology of fishes 39: 381–397. ostrand, k.g. & wilde, g.r. 2002. seasonal and spatial variation in a prairie stream-ﬁsh assemblage. ecology of freshwater fish 11: 137–149. paller, m.c. 1994. relationships between ﬁsh assemblage structure and stream order in south carolina coastal plain streams. transactions of the american fisheries society 123: 150–161. poff, n.l. & allan, j.d. 1995. functional organization of stream ﬁsh assemblages in relation to hydrological variability. ecology 76: 606–627. polis, g.a. 1984. age structure component of niche width and intra-speciﬁc resource partitioning: can age groups function as ecological species? the american naturalist 123: 541–564. rahel, f.j. & hubert, w.a. 1991. fish assemblage and habitat gradients in a rocky mountain-great plains stream: biotic zonation and additive patterns of community change. transactions of the american fisheries society 120: 319–332. robison, h.w. & buchanan, t.m. 1988. fishes of arkansas. fayetteville, ar: university of arkansas press. 536 pp. rodriguez, m.a. & lewis, w.m., jr. 1994. regulation and stability in ﬁsh assemblages of neotropical ﬂoodplain lakes. oecologia 1994: 166–180. rosgen, d. 1996. applied river morphology. pagosa springs, co: wildland hydrology. 390 pp. ross, s.t. 2001. the inland ﬁshes of mississippi. oxford, ms: university press of mississippi. 624 pp. ross, s.t. & baker, j.a. 1983. the response of ﬁshes to in a southeastern stream. the periodic spring ﬂoods american midland naturalist 109: 1–14. saint-paul, u., zuanon, j., correa, m.a.v., garcia, m., fabre, n.n., berger, u. & junk, w.j. 2000. fish communities in central amazonian white- and blackwater ﬂoodplains. environmental biology of fishes 57: 235–250. schlosser, i.j. 1982. fish assemblage structure and function along two habitat gradients in a headwater stream. ecological monographs 52: 395–414. schlosser, i.j. 1985. flow regime, juvenile abundance and the assemblage structure of stream ﬁshes. ecology 66: 1484– 1490. schlosser, i.j. 1987. a conceptual framework for ﬁsh commu- nities in small warmwater streams. in: matthews, w.j. & heins, d.c., eds. community & evolutionary ecology of north american stream ﬁshes. norman, ok: university of oklahoma press, pp. 17–24. stalnaker, c.b., milhous, r.t. & bovee, k.d. 1989. hydrology and hydraulics applied to ﬁshery management in large rivers. in: dodge, d.p., ed. proceedings of the international large river symposium. canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences 106, pp. 13–30. taylor, c.m. 2000. a large-scale comparative analysis of rifﬂe and pool ﬁsh communities in an upland stream system. environmental biology of fishes 58: 89–95. taylor, c.m., matthews, w.j. & winston, m.r. 1996. temporal variation in mainstem and tributary ﬁsh communities in a great plains stream system. copeia 1996: 280–289. turner, t.f., trexler, j.c., miller, g.l. & toyer, k.e. 1994. temporal and spatial dynamics of larval and juvenile ﬁsh abundance in a temperate ﬂoodplain river. copeia 1994: 174–183. vadas, r.l. & orth, d.j. 1998. use of physical variables to discriminate visually determined mesohabitat types in north american streams. rivers 6: 143–159. vannote, r.l., minshall, g.w., cummins, k.w., sedell, j.r. & cushing, c.e. 1980. the river continuum concept. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 37: 130–137. waite, i.r. & carpenter, k.d. 2000. associations among ﬁsh assemblage structure and environmental variables in will- amette basin streams, oregon. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 754–770. winemiller, k.o., tarim, s., shormann, d. & cotner, j.b. 2000. fish assemblage structure in relation to environmental variation among brazos river oxbow lakes. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 451–468. 330  