ecology of freshwater fish 2012: 21: 349–362 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2012 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish consequences of changing climate and geomorphology for bioenergetics of juvenile sockeye salmon in a shallow alaskan lake jennifer r. grifﬁths, daniel e. schindler school of aquatic and fishery sciences, university of washington, box 355020, seattle, wa, usa accepted for publication january 24, 2012 abstract – in high northern latitudes, a wide range of geomorphic processes associated with ﬂuvial, glacial and permafrost activity may interact with climate change to produce unexpected changes in lake thermal regimes with attendant effects on ecological processes. we coupled output from a hydrodynamics model of lake thermal structure to a bioenergetics model to assess how alternative scenarios of climate change, geomorphic evolution and habitat restoration in a shallow alaskan lake may affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics and growth. in particular, we evaluated the metabolic costs of different thermal regimes and the potential for changes in consumption to offset those costs. increased water temperatures associated with future climate increased metabolic costs which were partially offset if ﬁsh were able to maintain feeding rates, expressed as a constant proportion of maximum consumption. in this lake, water levels have declined substantially in the last 50 years. simulated restored lake level had negligible effects on lake temperature and thus on sockeye salmon growth when compared to current conditions. maintaining lake connectivity to inlet tributaries (cooling lake temperature) was crucial in reducing sockeye salmon metabolic costs particularly with further drops in lake level and climate warming. while considerable research is focused on predicting future thermal and geomorphic conditions in aquatic ecosystems, these processes are rarely considered together, especially for lakes. understanding the biological responses to geomorphic–climate interactions will be required for developing scenarios for coping with ecosystem responses to global change and evaluating restoration alternatives, especially in high-latitude systems that support economically and culturally important ﬁsheries. key words: climate change; geomorphic evolution; bioenergetics; sockeye salmon; ﬁsheries introduction temperature is a primary driver of lake ecosystem dynamics, regulating the rates of biological and chemical processes as well as producing physical structure in the water column (wetzel 2001). the complexity of biological responses is a result of both direct (physiological) and indirect (ecological) effects of temperature. because they are ectotherms, environ- mental temperatures have profound effects on temper- ature-dependent physiological (consumption, metabolism, activity) of ﬁsh and ultimately their scope for growth (elliott 1982; jobling 1997). warming owing to ongoing climate change has and will rates continue to alter lake thermal conditions (stefan et al. 1996; schindler 1997; magnuson et al. 2000; living- stone 2003) and subsequently the growth and ecology of ﬁshes (mcdonald et al. 1996; magnuson et al. 1997; schindler et al. 2005). climatic forcing is overlaid onto a mosaic of regional and local landscape dynamics. volcanic, glacial, ﬂuvial and thermokarst processes actively shape landscapes, including lake basins, and may occur over ecologically relevant time scales (swanson et al. 1988). ecologically relevant geomorphic evolu- tion of lakes and the surrounding landscape can therefore occur simultaneously with contemporary climate change. such lakes may respond to changing correspondence: jennifer r. grifﬁths, school of aquatic and fishery sciences, university of washington, box 355020, seattle, wa 98195, usa. e-mail: jeng@u.washington.edu doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2012.00555.x 349 grifﬁths & schindler climate differently than lakes evolving on longer geologic times scales, and consequently, the physical and biological responses of these lakes will also differ. a challenge for ecologists is to understand the interactions between climate and geomorphology and the implications for ecological processes and the services they provide (e.g., ﬁsheries). these interac- tions are also important to the assessment of restora- tion measures used to address natural or anthropogenic geomorphic evolution. without explicit consideration of climate change, the consequences of restoration for future ﬁsh populations will be poorly characterised (e.g., battin et al. 2007). in high northern latitude lakes, cold temperatures the productivity and short growing seasons limit (brylinski & mann 1973). lakes in these regions are also particularly vulnerable to climate change because warming is occurring at rates up to twice the global average, with expectations that this trend will continue least a century (christensen et al. 2007). for at these ecosystems are often highly furthermore, dynamic because of their geologic histories and natural disturbance regimes because of the lack of human development. many such lakes in coastal alaskan watersheds provide rearing habitat for anad- romous paciﬁc salmon (oncorhynchus spp.). sockeye salmon (o. nerka) are especially dependent on lakes for rearing habitat, typically spending 1–2 years in freshwater prior to migrating as smolts to the marine environment (quinn 2005). the summer growing period is contracted, occurring from roughly ice break- up in may or june through late september or october. this period of freshwater growth is crucial, as marine survival is positively correlated with smolt body size in alaskan populations (koenings et al. 1993). tem- perature and growing season length are positively related to summer growth in alaska (edmundson & mazumder 2001; schindler et al. 2005; rich et al. 2009), although growth responses will also depend on prey production and density. sockeye salmon are valuable as an economic, recreational and cultural resource to communities throughout alaska. therefore, assessing the potential of climatic and geomorphic change to inﬂuence ﬁsh growth through changes to lake thermal regimes is needed for resource management and developing adaptation strategies for future climate change. here, we build upon previous research that assessed how past climate change and geomorphic evolution may interact to alter lake thermal regimes in a shallow alaskan lake using a hydrodynamics model (grifﬁths et al. 2011). we extend our original analyses to include future climate change and compare juvenile sockeye salmon growth under these thermal regimes to characterise sockeye salmon vulnerability to future climate and geomorphic change. further, we assess the 350 potential effects of future restoration efforts intended to ameliorate ongoing geomorphic evolution. study site physical characteristics the chignik watershed (n56°16¢ w158°50¢, fig. 1) on the alaska peninsula drains southward to the gulf of alaska through two lakes and a semi-enclosed lagoon. black lake is a large (35 km2), shallow (max depth  4 m) and turbid lake surrounded by low-lying topography on the north side of the alaska peninsula. the lake is highly sensitive to variation in air temperature (narver 1966) with 50% of the variation in mean daily summer water temperature explained by air temperature and is highly productive for south- western alaskan sockeye salmon lakes (burgner et al. 1969). volcanic and glacial activity has strongly inﬂuenced the formation and evolution of black lake. a terminal moraine from the recession of the late wisconsin glacial ice-cap 12,000–10,000 years ago (miller & smith 1987) forms the northern shore of black lake (knappen 1926). also the large, caldera- forming eruptions of mt. veniamin of approximately 3700 years ago likely had a large impact on ancient black lake with debris ﬂows exceeding 50 km (miller & smith 1987). geomorphic change tributary, fluvial geomorphic processes in the west fork river, black river and alec river have characterised the rapid evolution of the upper chignik watershed. sediment transport, downstream migration of the west fork, bed erosion in the black river channel and sediment inﬁlling have resulted in a two-metre drop in lake level and a 40% loss of black lake volume since 1960 (ruggerone 2003; elhakeem & papanicolaou 2008). substantial migrations of black lake’s primary inlet the alec river, have also occurred during this period. while in the 1960s the north channel carried the majority of alec river volume into the main lake body, the south channel currently carries 50–70% of the water volume to a bay at the lake outlet (ruggerone 2003; university of washington alaska salmon program (uw-asp), unpublished data). a permanent spit has also developed between the outlet bay and main lake (ruggerone 2003). with discharge continuing to migrate to the south channel and the growth of the spit, there is a concern that the main lake basin may eventually be deprived of its main water source. if lake volume continues to decline at similar rates, a loss of 80% of the 1960s storage capacity is predicted by 2100 (elhakeem & papani- colaou 2008). a proposed restoration strategy would changing climate and geomorphology affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics united south-west fig. 1. chignik watershed, (n56°16¢ alaska, states w158°50¢). key features of the watershed are indicated. the alec river carries approximately 80% of the inlet water to black lake that ﬂows out to chignik lake via the black river at the southern bay of the lake. stabilise the lake outlet and raise the lake level to restore the majority of the black lake’s historic storage capacity (elhakeem & papanicolaou 2008). in the process of doing so, migration of the alec river away from black lake would also be eliminated, thereby maintaining the connectivity of the main source of water to the ecosystem. climate change climate warming has been observed throughout alaska in the last half century (stafford et al. 2000). spring air temperature (april–june) has increased in the chignik watershed by approximately 1.4 °c (westley 2007) between 1960 and 2005. a shift to towards earlier ice break-up has been observed in several south-western alaskan lakes (schindler et al. 2005, uw-asp, unpublished data). for example, ice break-up on lake aleknagik in bristol bay now typically occurs about 7 days earlier than in the mid- twentieth century. projections of future climate conditions from global circulations models show warming in all seasons in alaska (christensen et al. 2007). while the greatest warming in alaska will likely be in fall and winter, warming in summer months will still be substantial. mean summer temperatures of coastal regions around 60°n are projected to increase on average by 2 °c by 2050 under mid-range greenhouse gas emission sce- narios (schindler & rogers 2009). sockeye salmon sockeye salmon are the dominant ﬁsh species in the chignik watershed and are the primary target of commercial and subsistence ﬁsheries. sockeye salmon 351 grifﬁths & schindler spawn in the inlet tributaries to black lake, notably in the alec river, during august and september. spawning escapements (i.e., the component of the stock that is not harvested) to black lake averaged 460,000 ﬁsh annually from 1977 to 2009. fry emerge in april and migrate downstream to black lake where they rear time before migrating to the ocean the following spring. for a variable amount of historically, the majority of sockeye salmon reared in black lake for a complete year before migrating to the ocean (burgner et al. 1969). however, climate change and geomorphic evolution have likely placed a number of constraints on summer rearing and over- wintering (ruggerone 2000) in black lake such that fry now emigrate downstream by winter after their ﬁrst growing season and spend a substantial component of their freshwater rearing in chignik lake where they may compete with chignik lake origin sockeye salmon (simmons 2009). median date of black lake summer fry emigration was signiﬁcantly earlier in the warm years 1991–92 and 2005–06 than in the cold, early 1970s (westley et al. 2008). migrants in 2005 had lower body condition (weight at a given length) than fry remaining in the lake. this indicated that emigrating fry were experiencing elevated metabolic rates because of warmer temperatures and were unable to physiologically or behaviourally compensate for those elevated rates while in black lake. black lake’s sensitivity to air temperature could strongly affect juvenile sockeye salmon rearing con- ditions under future climate change with lake thermal regimes warming in response to increased air temper- ature. however, hydrologic connectivity and geomor- phic evolution may interact with future climate change to dampen or accentuate thermal stress. grifﬁths et al. (2011) used a hydrodynamics model to simulate water temperatures for a range of geomorphic evolution and climate (past and current) scenarios. we expanded upon these simulations, using the hydrodynamics model to assess the effects of future air temperature increases on lake thermal regimes. we coupled water temperature predictions from the hydrodynamics model to a bioenergetics model for sockeye salmon (beauchamp et al. 1989; hanson et al. 1997) to assess the metabolic costs and consumption compensation by juvenile sockeye salmon to alternate future climate, geomorphology and restoration scenarios. methods water temperature predictions hydrodynamics model grifﬁths et al. (2011) validated the use of the dynamic reservoir simulation model (dyresm, imberger & patterson 1981) for predicting black lake summer 352 mixing patterns and temperatures, with 88% of the variation observed in mean daily temperature captured by the model for the summer of 2008 and with a mean absolute error of 0.54 °c (±0.44). meteorology inputs included air temperature, vapour pressure, precipita- tion, solar radiation and wind speed. hydrologic variables included daily inﬂows and inﬂow tempera- ture. grifﬁths et al. (2011) discussed the sources of input data in detail. volume and connectivity dyresm was used to predict black lake tempera- tures under alternative scenarios of volume (lake level) and hydrologic connectivity based on 2008 conditions (grifﬁths et al. 2011). volume conditions were a considered 2-m maximum lake level (80% loss of current volume), a 4-m lake level (current volume) and a 6-m lake volume (160% increase in lake volume) via a proposed restoration strategy. under scenarios of volume decline, three levels of hydrologic connectiv- ity to the alec river were used to simulate lake water temperatures. the high-connectivity scenario (high) simulated the entire discharge of the alec river entering the main lake basin. the reduced-connectivity scenario (reduced) represented the migration of the south alec channel away from the lake, and therefore, only water carried by the north alec channel contrib- uted to the lake water budget. the no-connectivity scenario (no) represented no ﬂow from the alec river entering the lake. future climate conditions we expanded upon the analyses in grifﬁths et al. (2011) to generate water temperature scenarios based on future air temperature conditions. air temperature is a strong driver of black lake thermal regimes (narver 1966), and summer air temperatures are expected to increase on average by about 2 °c in coastal south-west alaska by 2050 (schindler & rogers 2009). this set of simulations enabled us to explore potential interactions between ongoing climate change and ongoing geomorphic evolution, including the possibility for restoration, in controlling growth potential in juvenile sockeye salmon. the delta method is an approach that captures underlying short-term variability in the climate while accounting for projected change in climate variables (n. mantua, university of washington, personal communication). the projected change in air temperature by 2050 (+2 °c) was added to the observed temperature in 2008. dyresm simulations were run using these forecasted air temperatures while holding all other meteorological inputs at current conditions to predict lake temperature responses to future air temperatures. air temperature directly affected lake energy ﬂuxes calculated by dyresm but is not incorporated into changing climate and geomorphology affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics inlet stream water temperatures which were input separately and reﬂected current climate conditions. these simulations were conducted over the period mid-june to late august, and the hydrologic data were not available to explore scenarios of increasing growing season duration. assessment of metabolism and growth we used the wisconsin bioenergetics model (hanson et al. 1997) to assess the metabolic response of juvenile sockeye salmon to alternative thermal regimes. this model uses an energy balance approach where the energy available for growth (g) equals the energy obtained from consumption (c) minus the energy lost to metabolic (respiration) processes (m) and waste (w), g = c ) (m + w). temperature and metabolic scal- ing of metabolism and consumption were parameter- ised according to beauchamp et al. (1989) for sockeye salmon. rates of consumption for cool and cold water ﬁshes increase with temperature below the optimal consumption temperature (20 °c with unlimited access to food) and decrease rapidly above their optimal temperature (as in thornton & lessem 1978). rates of respiration, on the other hand, increase exponentially with temperature (brett 1971). the scope for growth is greatest at the maximum difference between mainte- nance and maximum energy intake (elliott 1976). thus, maximum growth occurs not at the temperature which produces maximum consumption rates but where the difference between consumption rate and metabolic rate is the greatest. with unlimited food availability, this optimal growth temperature is as- sumed to be 15 °c for sockeye salmon (brett 1971), but declines at lower feeding rates. the model was used to estimate the proportion of maximum consumption (pcmax) to produce the observed growth rate based on the diet composition and temperature conditions. the parameter pcmax and observed temperatures were then used by the model to estimate the consumption over the course of the simulation period and to calculate the average daily ration. observed growth juvenile sockeye salmon were sampled via beach seine in the littoral habitat of black lake from early june to late august in 2010, a year with similar thermal conditions to 2008 (see details under bioen- ergetics modelling scenarios). the seine (35 m · 4 m, 3 mm bag mesh) was deployed at ﬁve sampling sites approximately every 7 days. additionally, pelagic sampling was conducted at the end of august as juvenile salmon typically move offshore by late summer, although black lake does not have a true pelagic habitat. pelagic sampling was conducted at night to reduce net avoidance (narver 1966). a net with a 1.2 m · 1.2 m opening was towed at constant speed between two boats for 10 min at ﬁve sites in the main lake basin. sockeye salmon from beach seine and townet sampling were euthanised in a buffered ms-222 solution, measured (fork length) to the nearest mm, and weight from a subsample of ﬁsh was taken to the nearest 0.1 g. stomach contents were collected from 10 to 15 individuals per site for ﬁve sampling events and preserved in 95% ethanol for later analysis. diet composition in the laboratory, stomach contents of juvenile sock- eye salmon were pooled by site for each sample date. diets were pooled because ﬁsh sampled at a given time may vary greatly in the fullness and digestion stage but this may not reﬂect persistent differences in consumption. detection of persistent differences would require the use of other methods that integrate over longer timeframes. samples were diluted to a known volume, and using a stempel pipette, consec- utive subsamples were enumerated under a dissecting microscope until 400 organisms were obtained (similar to parr 1972). zooplankton were either identiﬁed to order (copepods) or to genus (cladocer- ans). insects were identiﬁed to family or to order. an average number of diet items per ﬁsh were calculated by sample date. the taxa groups were then multiplied by food unit values previously established for this system (parr 1972) to estimate mass-weighted diet proportions. model inputs and parameter estimation juvenile sockeye salmon pcmax and average daily ration were obtained by ﬁtting the bioenergetics model to the growth, diet and temperature data observed over the summer growing season in 2010. temperature was monitored quasi-continuously in the main lake basin using a hobo water temperature logger pro v2 (onset corporation, bourne, ma, usa). we assume that access to prey is accounted for in the observed growth used to ﬁt the model. prey energy densities used were 2856 joulesæg)1 wet mass for insects (chironomids all life stages, cummins & wuycheck 1971), 2382 joulesæg)1 wet mass for copepods (average of range summarised in schindler & eby 1997) and 1674 joulesæg)1 wet mass for bosmina (schindler & eby 1997). prey energy densities are assumed not to vary throughout the summer. initial and ﬁnal weights for the model were obtained from the 2010 juvenile sockeye salmon length–weight the average sized ﬁsh on the ﬁrst and last sampling date (table 1). regression for bioenergetics model scenarios we assessed the effects of alternative thermal regimes on respiration costs and the potential offset of those 353 grifﬁths & schindler table 1. inputs to bioenergetics model for 2010 ﬁt, and ﬁtted parameter values and inputs for scenario simulations. 2010 model ﬁt simulation length initial mass (g) final mass (g) pcmax )1) average ration (gæg estimated consumption (g) )1æday values for scenario simulations simulation length initial mass pcmax average ration parameter values 82 0.35 4.17 0.65 0.16 23.14 70 0.54 0.66 0.16 costs via consumption. we compared simulations in which daily ration was constant to those in which pcmax remained constant. under constant ration scenarios, the daily consumption rate is ﬁxed but the energy allocated to metabolism varies with tempera- ture. thus, if temperatures increase from initial model ﬁtting, metabolic energy demands increase and lower growth is achieved. on the other hand, because cmax is a function of temperature, using a ﬁxed pcmax allows daily consumption rates to also change with temperature. the scope for growth is thus dependent on the rate of change of both consumption and metabolism with temperature. the pcmax and con- stant ration values used were from the model ﬁt to 2010 data. temperature inputs were mean daily temperature predictions produced by dyresm for all scenarios for 2008. the observed number of degree days (943.1) and average temperature (12.6 °c) were the same during the observed growing season in 2008 and 2010; thus, we believe the use of 2010 parameter values to be a reasonable approximation to growth conditions sockeye salmon experienced in 2008. diet composition and prey energy density were constant across all scenarios. first, we compared seasonal growth and daily growth rates among lake volume and connectivity scenarios for ﬁsh rearing under current and future climate conditions when feeding at a constant ration. we then assessed the response juvenile sockeye salmon growth across all scenarios when consumption responded to temperature; in other words, a constant pcmax was maintained. results water temperature simulations volume and connectivity grifﬁths et al. (2011) showed that increases in lake volume (outlet restoration) had a negligible effect on black lake thermal regimes (fig. 2a). however, the 354 thermal responses to continued lake volume decline varied with the level of connectivity to cool inlet streams. the removal of one or both alec river channels from the lake hydrology led to substantially warmer summer lake thermal regimes (fig. 2c) in the absence of any climate change. climate change a 2 °c increase in air temperature generated an average 1 °c increase in water temperature in dyresm simulations with current volume and connectivity (fig. 2b). this translated into an approximately 8% increase in the number of summer degree days, and the expected percent of days with mean temperature exceeding the optimum temperature for sockeye salmon growth (i.e., 15 °c degree when feeding at unlimited food supply) increased from 10% to 27% from the baseline year during the 70 simulation period. future air temperature conditions for all volume-connectivity scenarios resulted in a similar water temperature response, an increase in an average of 1 °c between current and future climate conditions (fig. 2). metabolic and growth assessment observed growth a total of 1627 juvenile sockeye salmon length observations were made in 2010. of those individuals, 1050 were also retained for mass. the length–weight relationship is represented by the following equation: log10 (mass) = 3.73*log10 (length) ) 6.25 (r2 = 0.97, p = 0.0). juvenile sockeye salmon in black lake on june 9 had a mean length of 35.8 ± 3.2 mm (n = 56) and a mass of 0.35 g. final observed mean length on august 28 was 69.7 ± 5.3 mm (n = 341) with a mass of 4.17 g. diet composition juvenile sockeye salmon diets were dominated by aquatic insects through early august after which sockeye salmon switched to consuming zooplankton. chironomids comprised 98% of all insects in the diets. through early august, the zooplankton present in the diets were primarily calanoid and cyclopoid copepods, while late august diets were dominated by bosmina. the seasonal shift to observations by parr (1972) from 1968 to 1970 and ruggerone (1994) in 1993 (fig. 3). in composition is similar pcmax and ration size estimation the bioenergetics model estimated that juvenile sockeye salmon were feeding at a pcmax of 0.66 over the observed 82-day period. the average esti- mated daily speciﬁc growth rate was 0.031 g of prey allocated to growth per gram of predator mass (gæg)1æday)1). the average ration over this period changing climate and geomorphology affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics 22 (a) ] c ° [ e r u t a r e p m e t 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 4m high, current 6m high, current 4m high, future 6m high, future 22 (b) 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 180 200 220 240 180 2m high, current 2m reduce, current 2m no, current 2m high, future 2m reduce, future 2m no, future 4m high, current 4m reduce, current 4m no, current 4m high, future 4m reduce, future 4m no, future 22 (c) 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 200 220 day number 240 180 200 220 240 fig. 2. dyresm simulated water temperatures for lake volume (lake level), tributary connectivity and climate scenarios: (a) current lake level (4 m) and restoration lake level (6 m) under current and future air temperature conditions (+2 °c); (b) current lake-level scenarios for scenarios of tributary connectivity (high, reduce, no) under current and future air temperature conditions; and (c) further lake-level decline (to 2 m) under each tributary connectivity and air temperature scenario. early summer late summer 9.5 °c 10.0 °c 9.9 °c 10.3 °c 8.8 °c 12.6 °c 12.1 °c 11.3 °c 13.3 °c 11.8 °c t e d i f o  n o i t r o p o r p 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 8 6 9 1 9 6 9 1 0 7 9 1 3 9 9 1 0 1 0 2 8 6 9 1 9 6 9 1 0 7 9 1 3 9 9 1 0 1 0 2 year insects zooplankton fig. 3. juvenile sockeye salmon diet composition in early (late june–early july) and late (late august–early september) summer. historic data were collected by parr (1972, for 1968–1970 as food units) and ruggerone (1994, for 1993 as wet mass). average monthly air temperature is noted above each year with june temperatures used for early summer and august temperatures used for late summer. chironomids of all life stages dominated the insect category. early zooplankton were primarily copepods, while late zooplankton are heavily dominated by bosmina. was 0.16 gæg)1æday)1. the water temperature scenarios were simulated for fewer days (70 days) and began on a later date than the 2010 growth observations. thus, ﬁsh mass estimated by the 2010 model for day 167 was used as the initial mass for all water temperature scenario simulations (table 1). metabolic costs of geomorphic evolution, restoration and climate change increased lake level associated with outlet restoration did not alter the metabolic costs for juvenile sockeye salmon from current lake levels under either current or future climate regimes (fig. 4a). metabolic costs 355 grifﬁths & schindler ) g ( s s a m 4.6 4.2 3.8 3.4 4.6 4.2 3.8 3.4 4.6 4.2 3.8 3.4 constant ration 4m 6m (a) t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f high high 4m (b) t n e r r u c e r u t u f high e r u t u f t n e r r u c reduce t n e r r u c e r u t u f no 2m (c) t n e r r u c e r u t u f high t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c reduce e r u t u f no 4.6 4.2 3.8 3.4 4.6 4.2 3.8 3.4 4.6 4.2 3.8 3.4 constant pcmax 4m 6m (d) t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u u f t high high 4m (e) t n e r r u c e r u t u f high e r u t u f t n e r r u c reduce 2m t n e r r u c e r u t u f no (f) t n e r r u c e r u t u f high e r u t u f t n e r r u c reduce t n e r r u c e r u t u f no climate and connectivity scenario increased with warmer thermal regimes associated with the loss of tributary connectivity at current lake levels with the average ﬁsh growing 5% less under no connectivity (fig. 4b). high connectivity at the current lake level buffered the increased metabolic costs owing to the effect of warmer future air temperatures on lake temperature. growth declines were limited to a 10% decrease with high connectivity to cool inlet streams under future climate conditions rather than a 14–16% decrease (fig. 4b). the effect of declining lake volume on metabolic costs depended on connec- tivity. cooler lake temperatures associated with high connectivity substantially reduced metabolic costs under both current and future air temperature condi- tions (fig. 4c). similar increases in metabolic costs 356 fig. 4. juvenile sockeye salmon mass (g) after the 70-day bioenergetics simulation for each scenario under either a constant ration (a–c) or constant pcmax (d–f). restoration (a, d), tributary connectivity (b, e) and further lake-level decline (c, f) are shown. the air temperature scenario (current or future) and the level of tributary connectivity (high, reduce, no) are labelled on the x-axis. lake level (2, 4, 6 m) is noted in each plot. the horizontal dashed line indicates growth simulated under the base- line conditions (4-m high connectivity) with either constant ration or constant pcmax. inlet because of warmer air temperatures were simulated when connectivity was reduced or lost. consumption offsets of seasonal metabolic costs the differences in growth performance between current and increased lake-level scenarios remained negligible in simulations where pcmax was main- tained (fig. 4d). declines in juvenile sockeye salmon growth associated with the loss of tributary connec- tivity and increased air temperature (fig. 4e) were smaller than in simulations where sockeye salmon maintained ration (above). growth decreased by only 5% from the baseline (4-m high connectivity) because of increased air temperatures instead of by 10% and decreased growth because of constant a changing climate and geomorphology affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics the lack of connectivity was limited; notably, under future climate scenarios, growth decreased only up to 7% instead of up to 16% as was predicted in scenarios with no connectivity and future climate condition. the ﬁnal mass achieved showed the greatest variation among shallow lake scenarios (fig. 4f). across all constant pcmax scenarios, the greatest decrease in growth occurred in shallow lakes under warmer air temperatures and no inlet connectivity. fine-scale buffering of daily growth rates we also evaluated the daily variation in growth rates produced in bioenergetics simulations to assess the effect of different climate and geomorphic conditions on the development of potentially stressful conditions at short time scales. daily growth rates showed substantial variation within scenarios with lower growth rates during warm periods with higher meta- bolic rates (see fig. 2 for temperatures, day numbers 188–197 and 217–225) and in late summer when the diet was dominated by less energy-dense prey. while at a seasonal scale there was little effect of increased lake level on juvenile sockeye salmon growth, there were days where growth rates were higher in the restored lake-level scenario (fig. 5a,d). these days were the warmest of the simulation period (days noted e n i l  e s a b m o r f e t a r t h w o r g y l i a d  n i e c n e r e f f i d t n e c r e p constant ration constant pcmax (a) 4m 6m t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f high high (b) 4m t n e r r u c e r u t u f high e r u t u f t n e r r u c reduce t n e r r u c e r u t u f no (c) 2m 10 0 −10 −20 −30 10 0 −10 −20 −30 10 0 −10 −20 −30 (d) 4m 6m t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f high high (e) 4m t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f high reduce no (f) 2m 10 0 −10 −20 −30 10 0 −10 −20 −30 10 0 −10 −20 −30 t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f high reduce no t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f t n e r r u c e r u t u f high reduce no climate and connectivity scenario fig. 5. percent difference in daily growth from baseline (4-m high connectivity, current climate) for ﬁsh growth simulated under either constant ration (a–c) or constant pcmax (d–f). scenarios are grouped and labelled as in figure 4. the thick black line is the median, the box encapsulates the ﬁrst and third quartiles, and the whiskers indicate ±1.5*iqr. 357 grifﬁths & schindler above), indicating ﬁne-scale dampening of extreme temperatures. daily temperature reached a maximum of 15.4 °c in the restoration scenario under current climate, while in the baseline scenario temperatures reached 16.1 °c. the short-term buffering under current climate conditions was also apparent under the future air temperature scenario. the declines in daily growth rate from the baseline were dampened with increased lake level (fig. 5a,d). at a current lake level, loss of inlet connectivity coupled with increased air temperatures increased both the median percent decline in daily growth rates and the variation in decline among days at a constant ration (fig. 5b). maintaining a constant pcmax reduced the median change in growth across all current lake-level scenarios (fig. 5e). climate change scenarios, how- ever, still produced higher variation in daily growth rates, and all growth rates were lower than the baseline. the shallow lake scenarios produced the greatest amount of variation within and among scenarios in daily growth (fig. 5c,f). under current climate condi- tions, median differences in metabolic cost were positive for high-connectivity scenarios but negative for reduced- and no-connectivity scenarios (fig. 5c). variation among days was also greatest in the no- connectivity scenario, reﬂecting the increased vari- ability in daily lake temperatures. consumption reduced the median percent change in daily growth rate from the baseline but the no-connectivity scenario had the greatest range of differences from the baseline (fig. 5f). climate change again affected the median and range of differences under the constant ration scenarios (fig. 5c). while the median difference was buffered by consumption, the response to climate was highly variable among days and the variability increased with decreasing connectivity (fig. 5f). discussion our simulations showed that increased air tempera- ture coupled to the loss of tributary connectivity had the largest negative effect on juvenile sockeye salmon growth in a shallow alaskan lake via increased water temperatures. across all simulations, future climate scenario water temperatures substan- tially increased metabolic costs which could be partially offset by maintaining a constant feeding rate expressed as a percentage of their physiological maximum rate. high inlet connectivity scenarios showed the least decline in growth for a given lake level owing to cooling effects on lake temperature. thus, maintaining inlet tributary connectivity was the most for maintaining proﬁtable growth conditions in black lake under current or future climate regimes. important factor 358 further lake-level decline acted to magnify meta- bolic costs for sockeye salmon if connectivity was lost and increased the variability of daily growth rates. restoration associated with increased lake level, on the other hand, had little effect on seasonal sockeye salmon bioenergetics via changes in water temperature and did not mitigate climate-related costs. restoration, however, did provide ﬁne-scale buffering for growth rates on the most extreme warm days by reducing the magnitude of water temperature increases. the increased metabolic costs found here are consistent with other bioenergetics assessments of climate change impacts. in simulations with ﬁxed rations, young-of-the-year (yoy) lake_trout starved under water temperature conditions that were 3 °c warmer (mcdonald et al. 1996). alternatively, for these yoy lake_trout to achieve baseline growth, they would need to consume eight times as much food. less severe declines in growth occurred for lake_trout, yellow perch and largemouth bass (97%, 80% and 70% of observed rates, respectively) in simulations restricted to baseline consumption under future ther- mal regimes (hill & magnuson 1990). our simulations, as well as the studies mentioned above, use model parameters that are species-speciﬁc or borrowed from closely related species. these models therefore do not account for locally adapted populations that may show variation in thermal optima for a variety of physiological processes. it has been shown that populations of adult sockeye salmon in the fraser river (british columbia, canada) show sub- stantially different temperature optima for aerobic scope (eliason et al. 2011) with important conse- quences for migration under changing climate. if this is the case for the suite of physiological processes that affect the negative effects of warmer thermal regimes may be dampened if black lake populations had growth optima reﬂecting adaptations to the relatively warm temperatures in this shallow lake. these species-speciﬁc parameter models are the best tools at present for assessing the general bioen- ergetics responses of ﬁsh to changes in lake thermal regimes, but assessing local adaption for the range of temperature-dependent physiological processes would provide additional support for maintaining diverse populations of sockeye salmon. the growth, little as 1 °c increase in water fish mitigate thermal stress in aquatic environments through behavioural mechanisms when experiencing as temperature (crawshaw & o’connor 1997). in heterothermal environments, behavioural adaptation may reduce exposure to higher temperatures and this may mini- mise the negative effects of temperature on growth. comparisons of lake_trout and yellow perch growth with a ﬁxed ration under conditions of thermoregula- tory or stationary behaviour showed that the latter changing climate and geomorphology affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics produced greater declines in growth (hill & magnuson 1990). in black lake, we estimated that a 2 °c increase in air temperature would produce a 1 °c temperature. however, average increase in water black lake mixes throughout the summer season and is lacking in any deep water thermal refugia, similar to many large and wind-exposed northern lakes (schindler & smol 2006). fish can also offset metabolic costs by increasing consumptions rates or consuming more energy-dense resources if available. in the scenarios explored here, maintaining a constant proportion of maximum con- sumption had the potential to offset some of the seasonal costs associated with connectivity loss as well as with climate change. while growth is sensitive to prey energy density, our use of a single estimated value of pcmax or average ration across all scenarios results in prey energy density simply being a scalar value and does not alter the relative importance of the factors determining growth. we did not explore seasonal changes in diet composition among scenarios because there is no evidence that seasonal diet composition has changed over the past 40 years of rapid environmental change (fig. 3). the response of juvenile salmonid growth to temperature conditions is ultimately mediated by food production and availabil- ity (edmundson & mazumder 2001; schindler et al. 2005; rich et al. 2009; crozier et al. 2010). both of these mechanisms affect the ability of juvenile sockeye salmon to maintain pcmax. the response of zooplankton and aquatic insects to climate warming appears to be species speciﬁc (adrian et al. 2006), and thus, assessing sockeye salmon access to prey resources in future presents a challenge. bosmina, which dominate the late summer zooplankton community in black lake, had a large, positive production response to earlier ice-outs and more degree days in the lower wood river lakes, south-west alaska, but smaller or negative responses in the upper lakes (carter 2010). daphnia, although rarely observed in black lake (uw-asp, unpublished data), have shown strong positive responses to warming temperatures in large number of lake systems including those in the wood river lakes (carter 2010) as well as europe (straile & geller 1998). at a continental scale, daphnia population abundance appears to be greatest when lake temperatures are between 15 and 20 °c (gillooly & dodson 2000), and therefore, they may be a larger component of future black lake zooplankton commu- nities, depending on the planktivory pressures on them. thus, there is the potential for zooplankton resources to maintain production rates that are sufﬁcient to offset at least some of the increase in juvenile sockeye salmon consumption. temperature also has an inﬂuential role in the physiology and ecology of aquatic insects. thus, warming lake thermal regimes may alter timing and duration of emergence, seasonal growth rates, abun- dance, and body size and fecundity (ward 1992). high arctic communities have exhibited changes in both the abundance and species composition of chironomid assemblages since 1850 corresponding to warming temperatures and shifts in algal communities (quinlan et al. 2005). furthermore, change in water level and the stability of intra-annual water level ﬂuxes strongly affect aquatic insect production (hall et al. 1999) by altering the availability and stability of littoral habitat. thus, while we have shown that climate warming and certain aspects of geomorphic evolution will reduce the thermal proﬁtability of juvenile sockeye salmon habitat, parallel increases in invertebrate prey produc- tion may offset these losses but have not been quantiﬁed. furthermore, we have not accounted for the expan- sion of the growing season with earlier ice break-up and later cooling in the fall. while summer growing conditions in black lake may degrade with climate or geomorphic evolution, spring and fall growing condi- tions may improve and buffer against decreased summer growth. in other south-west alaska lakes, earlier ice break-ups lead to longer growing seasons, warmer lake temperatures and increased growth of juvenile sockeye (schindler et al. 2005). our model- ling scenarios focus on the june–august period because of concerns that if current physiological stress causes early summer emigrations, further lake warm- ing will exacerbate stress and downstream competition in chignik lake. the timing, magnitude and body condition of black lake emigrants have changed over the past four decades with earlier larger migrations of poor condition ﬁsh occurring in the 2000s (westley et al. 2008). in 2005, a year with one of the warmest springs on record, the ﬁsh remaining in black lake over the summer grew large but catch rates were very low and it appeared that a large fraction of the population migrated downstream to cooler chignik lake (westley et al. 2008). taken together our results suggest that maintaining connectivity to cool inlet streams is more important for maintaining proﬁtable thermal conditions for juvenile sockeye salmon than maintaining lake volume in shallow lakes undergoing rapid geomorphic evolution such as that seen in black lake. the beneﬁts of highly connected lake are maintained with increased in air temperature, but as black lake shallows, it is more likely to experience rapid temperature increases and temperatures above 15 °c leading to lower growth rates. when food is limiting, the optimal temperature for growth is lower (<15 °c), and thus, stressful conditions will occur at cooler temperatures. mean summer water temperature was 14 °c in 2005 (the maximum mean daily temperature was 17 °c), the 359 grifﬁths & schindler year in which there was substantial, early emigration of poor condition ﬁsh. the potential for behavioural avoidance of suboptimal temperatures in the lake is limited, and thus, prey production and density- dependent effects under alternate scenarios are likely very important. density and temperature have been shown to have strong interactive effects on growth (crozier et al. 2010), and these two factors vary within and among years in black lake. the responses of juvenile sockeye salmon to changing climate and geomorphology in high-latitude ecosystems are likely to be varied and complex. while substantial progress has been made towards exploring the potential effects of climate warming on lake thermal regimes and ﬁshes (e.g., magnuson et al. 1990; de stasio et al. 1996; stefan et al. 1996), such analyses assume that geomorphic evolution of lakes is slow enough as to be inconsequential. however, in high-latitude lakes whose watersheds are either geo- logically young or unstable, or are characterised by extensive permafrost, we should expect that geomor- phic evolution may occur on ecologically relevant time scales in some situations. how such geomorphic changes will interact with ongoing climate change to affect the viability of ﬁsh populations remains highly uncertain, and models are an effective tool to explore the consequences for sockeye salmon under alternate future scenarios. given the physiological constraints governed by temperature, we can assess both the importance of ecological factors for juvenile sockeye salmon and the potential for policy and management actions to mitigate negative consequences for juvenile sockeye salmon. such assessments are vital in a region that is critically dependent on the harvest of sockeye salmon. acknowledgements this is a contribution of the university of washington alaska salmon program. we thank the gordon and betty moore foundation, alaska salmon processors, national science foun- dation, the us army corps of engineers, the h. mason keeler professorship and the chignik regional aquaculture association for support. jennifer grifﬁths received support from the roy jensen research fellowship from the university of washington school of aquatic and fishery sciences. countless individuals with the alaska salmon program (formerly fisheries research institute) and the alaska department of fish and game have contributed to our long-term understanding of the chignik watershed. additionally, assistance from the people of chignik lake village, especially julie slaton, the lind family and nick and virginia aleck, has made our work there possible. hannah stapleton performed diet laboratory work, and morgan bond, lindsy ciepiela and conrad gowell provided ﬁeld assistance. thank you to nate mantua for discussions on the delta method approach and to jonny armstrong for insightful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. thank you to two anonymous 360 reviewers for constructive comments that have improved the manuscript. references adrian, r., wilhelm, s. & gerten, d. 2006. life-history traits of lake plankton species may govern their phenological response to climate warming. global change biology 12: 652–661. battin, j., wiley, m.w., ruckelshaus, m.h., palmer, r.n., korb, e., bartz, k.k. & imaki, h. 2007. projected impacts of climate change on salmon habitat restoration. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america 104: 6720–6725. beauchamp, d.a., stewart, d.j. & thomas, g.l. 1989. corroboration of a bioenergetics model for sockeye-salmon. transactions of the american fisheries society 118: 597– 607. brett, j.r. 1971. energetic responses of salmon to temperature. a study of some thermal relations in the physiology and freshwater ecology of sockeye salmon (oncorhynchus ner- ka). american zoologist 11: 99–113. brylinski, m. & mann, k.h. 1973. analysis of factors governing productivity in lakes and reservoirs. limnology and oceanography 18: 1–14. burgner, r.l., diconstanzo, c.j., ellis, r.j., harry, g.y., hartman, w.l., kerns, o.e., mathisen, o.a. & royce, w.f. 1969. biological studies and estimates of optimum escape- ments of sockeye salmon in the major river systems in southwestern alaska. fishery bulletin 67: 405–459. carter, j.l. 2010. responses of zooplankton populations to four decades of climate warming in lakes of southwestern alaska. seattle, washington: m.s. thesis, university of washington. christensen, j.h., hewitson, b., busuioc, a., chen, a., gao, x., held, i., jones, r., kolli, r.k., kwon, w.-t., laprise, r., magana rueda, v., mearns, l., menedez, c.g., raisanen, j., rinke, a., sarr, a. & whetton, p. 2007. regional climate projections. in: solomon, s., qin, d., manning, m., chen, z., marquis, m., averyt, k.b., tignor, m. & miller, h.l., eds. climate change 2007: the physical science basis. contribu- tion of working group i to the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. cambridge: cambridge university press, pp. 849–940. crawshaw, l.i. & o’connor, c.s. 1997. behavioural compen- sation for long-term thermal change. in: wood, c.m. & mcdonald, d.g., eds global warming: implications for freshwater and marine ﬁsh. society for experimental biology seminar series. cambridge: cambridge university press, pp. 351–376. crozier, l.g., zabel, r.w., hockersmith, e.e. & achord, s. 2010. interacting effects of density and temperature on body size in multiple populations of chinook salmon. journal of animal ecology 79: 342–349. cummins, k.w. & wuycheck, j.c. 1971. caloric equivalents for investigations in ecological energetics. international associa- tion of theoretical and applied limnology 18: 1–158. de stasio, b.t., hill, d.k., kleinhans, j.m., nibbelink, n.p. & magnuson, j.j. 1996. potential effects of global climate change on small north-temperate lakes: physics, ﬁsh, and plankton. limnology and oceanography 41: 1136–1149. changing climate and geomorphology affect juvenile sockeye salmon bioenergetics edmundson, j.a. & mazumder, a. 2001. linking growth of juvenile sockeye salmon to habitat temperature in alaskan lakes. transactions of the american fisheries society 130: 644–662. elhakeem, m. & papanicolaou, a.n. 2008. evaluation of the reduction in the water storage capacity of black lake, ak. journal of river basin management 6: 63–77. eliason, e.j., clark, t.d., hague, m.j., hanson, l.m., gallagher, z.s., jeffries, k.m., gale, m.k., patterson, d.a., hinch, s.g. & farrell, a.p. 2011. differences in thermal tolerance among sockeye salmon populations. sci- ence 332: 109–112. elliott, j.m. 1976. energetics of feeding, metabolism and growth of brown_trout in relation to body-weight, water temperature and ration size. journal of animal ecology 45: 923–948. (salmo_trutta) elliott, j.m. 1982. the effects of temperature and ration size on the growth and energetics of salmonids in captivity. com- parative biochemistry and physiology b-biochemistry & molecular biology 73: 81–91. gillooly, j.f. & dodson, s.i. 2000. latitudinal patterns in the size distribution and seasonal dynamics of new world, freshwater cladocerans. limnology and oceanography 45: 22–30. grifﬁths, j.r., schindler, d.e., balistrieri, l.s. & ruggerone, g.t. 2011. effects of simultaneous climate change and geomorphic evolution on thermal characteristics of a shallow alaskan lake. limnology and oceanography 56: 193–205. hall, r.i., leavitt, p.r., dixit, a.s., quinlan, r. & smol, j.p. 1999. limnological succession in reservoirs: a paleolimno- logical comparison of two methods of reservoir formation. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 56: 1109–1121. hanson, p.c., johnson, t.b., schindler, d.e. & kitchell, j.f. 1997. fish bioenergetics 3.0. madison, wi: university of wisconsin sea grant institute. hill, d.k. & magnuson, j.j. 1990. potential effects of global climate warming on the growth and prey consumption of great-lakes ﬁsh. transactions of the american fisheries society 119: 265–275. imberger, j. & patterson, j.c. 1981. a dynamic reservoir simulation model – dyresm: 5. in: fischer, h.b., ed. transport models for inland and coastal waters. proceedings of a symposium on predictive ability. new york, ny: academic press, pp. 310–361. jobling, m. 1997. temperature and growth: modulation of growth rate via temperature change. in: wood, c.m. & mcdonald, d.g., eds. global warming: implications for freshwater and marine ﬁsh. society for experimental biology seminar series. cambridge: cambridge university press, pp. 225–253. knappen, r.s. 1926. geology and mineral resources of the aniakchak district. united states geological survey bulletin no. 797-f. washington, d.c. koenings, j.p., geiger, h.j. & hasbrouck, j.j. 1993. smolt-to- adult survival patterns of sockeye-salmon (oncorhynchus_nerka) – effects of smolt length and geographic latitude when entering the sea. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 50: 600–611. livingstone, d.m. 2003. impact of secular climate change on the thermal structure of a large temperate central european lake. climatic change 57: 205–225. magnuson, j.j., meisner, j.d. & hill, d.k. 1990. potential changes in the thermal habitat of great-lakes ﬁsh after global climate warming. transactions of the american fisheries society 119: 254–264. magnuson, j.j., webster, k.e., assel, r.a., bowser, c.j., dillon, p.j., eaton, j.g., evans, h.e., fee, e.j., hall, r.i., mortsch, l.r., schindler, d.w. & quinn, f.h. 1997. potential effects of climate changes on aquatic systems: laurentian great lakes and precambrian shield region. hydrological processes 11: 825–871. magnuson, j.j., robertson, d.m., benson, b.j., wynne, r.h., livingstone, d.m., arai, t., assel, r.a., barry, r.g., card, v., kuusisto, e., granin, n.g., prowse, t.d., stewart, k.m. & vuglinski, v.s. 2000. historical trends in lake and river ice cover in the northern hemisphere. science 289: 1743–1746. mcdonald, m.e., hershey, a.e. & miller, m.c. 1996. global warming impacts on lake_trout in arctic lakes. limnology and oceanography 41: 1102–1108. miller, t.p. & smith, r.l. 1987. late quaternary caldera- forming eruptions in the eastern aleutian arc, alaska. geology 15: 434–438. narver, d.w. 1966. pelagial ecology and carrying capacity of sockeye salmon in the chignik lakes, alas. seattle, wash- ington: ph.d. thesis, university of washington. parr, w.h. 1972. interactions between sockeye salmon and lake resident ﬁsh in the chignik lak. seattle, washington: m.s. thesis, university of washington. quinlan, r., douglas, m.s.v. & smol, j.p. 2005. food web changes in arctic ecosystems related to climate warming. global change biology 11: 1381–1386. quinn, t.p. 2005. the behavior and ecology of paciﬁc salmon and trout. seattle: american fisheries society and university of washington press. rich, h.b., quinn, t.p., scheuerell, m.d. & schindler, d.e. the 2009. climate and intraspeciﬁc competition control growth and life history of juvenile sockeye salmon (oncorhynchus_nerka) in iliamna lake, alaska. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 66: 238–246. ruggerone, g.t. 1994. investigations of salmon popula- tions, hydrology, and limnology of the chignik lakes, alaska, during 1993. seattle: natural resources consultants, inc. ruggerone, g.t. 2000. differential survival of juvenile sockeye and coho salmon exposed to low dissolved oxygen during winter. journal of fish biology 56: 1013–1016. ruggerone, g.t. 2003. rapid natural habitat degradation and consequences for sockeye salmon production in the chignik lakes system, alaska. seattle: natural resources consul- tants, inc for alaska salmon program, university of washington. http://ﬁsh.washington.edu/research/publications/ pdfs/0309.pdf. accessed 02/12/2012. schindler, d.w. 1997. widespread effects of climatic warming on freshwater ecosystems in north america. hydrological processes 11: 1043–1067. schindler, d.e. & eby, l.a. 1997. stoichiometry of ﬁshes and their prey: implications for nutrient recycling. ecology 78: 1816–1831. schindler, d.e. & rogers, l.a. 2009. responses of paciﬁc salmon to climate variation in freshwater ecosystems. in: kruger, c.c. & zimmerman, c.e., eds. paciﬁc salmon: 361 grifﬁths & schindler ecology and management of western alaska’s populations. bethesda: american fisheries society, pp. 1127–1142. schindler, d.w. & smol, j.p. 2006. cumulative effects of climate warming and other human activities on freshwa- ters of arctic and subarctic north america. ambio 35: 160–168. schindler, d.e., rogers, d.e., scheuerell, m.d. & abrey, c.a. 2005. effects of changing climate on zooplankton and juvenile sockeye salmon growth in southwestern alaska. ecology 86: 198–209. simmons, r.k. 2009. the stock-speciﬁc patterns of rearing by juvenile sockeye salmon (oncorhynchus_nerka) under a changing landscape in the chignik lake system, alas. seattle, washington: m.s. thesis, university of washington. stafford, j.m., wendler, g. & curtis, j. 2000. temperature and precipitation of alaska: 50 year trend analysis. theoretical and applied climatology 67: 33–44. stefan, h.g., hondzo, m., fang, x., eaton, j.g. & mccormick, j.h. 1996. simulated long-term temperature and dissolved oxygen characteristics of lakes in the north-central united states and associated ﬁsh habitat limits. limnology and oceanography 41: 1124–1135. straile, d. & geller, w. 1998. the response of daphnia to changes in trophic status and weather patterns: a case study from lake constance. ices journal of marine science 55: 775–782. swanson, f.j., kratz, t.k., caine, n. & woodmansee, r.g. 1988. landform effects on ecosystem patterns and processes. bioscience 38: 92–98. thornton, k.w. & lessem, a.s. 1978. temperature algorithm for modifying biological rates. transactions of the american fisheries society 107: 284–287. ward, j.v. 1992. aquatic insect ecology: 1. biology and habitat. new york: wiley and sons. westley, p.a.h. 2007. biocomplexity and rapid natural habitat change in the chignik lake system, alas. seattle, washing- ton: m.s. thesis, university of washington. 95 pp. westley, p.a.h., hilborn, r., quinn, t.p., ruggerone, g.t. & schindler, d.e. 2008. long-term changes in rearing habitat and downstream movement by juvenile sockeye salmon (oncorhynchus_nerka) in an interconnected alaska lake system. ecology of freshwater fish 17: 443–454. wetzel, r.g. 2001. limnology: lake and river ecosystems. san diego: academic press. 362  