ecology of freshwater fish 2012 printed in malaysia  all rights reserved letter ó 2012 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish a research programme in ﬁsh ecology leads to a supermodel: a tribute to professor robert j. wootton david c. heins department of ecology and evolutionary biology, tulane university, new orleans, la usa accepted for publication april 4, 2012 model organisms, which are tractable and readily accessible species, have become critical tools in bio- logical research including areas of ecology and evo- lutionary biology. they have helped biologists gain enormous insights into the operation of the natural world. extensive study of one particular model in the search for knowledge that may apply to other organ- isms is made possible by the darwinian phenomenon of descent with modiﬁcation and the conserved nat- ure of many biological properties. a number of individual species of ﬁshes have become important models for basic research, some of which may potentially provide applied informa- tion affecting human health and well-being. one species has been the focus of increasingly intensive basic research by ecologists and evolutionists for the past forty-plus years. the threespine stickleback gasterosteus aculeatus linnaeus 1758 is receiving attention from a number of subdisciplines in the bio- logical sciences. the strong draw of this ﬁnger-size ﬁsh to researchers in diverse specialisations is allow- ing a synthesis of evolutionary knowledge and has led to the threespine stickleback being named a ‘supermodel’ by gibson (2005). that any organism reaches the point of being des- ignated ‘supermodel’ means it supports a rather large research programme involving many biologists addressing many questions. history is built from the efforts of individuals and thus is a story of individual endeavours and accomplishments. the history of the threespine stickleback as a model organism in biology will include the names of many before the ﬁnal chapter is written – some per- haps more prominent than others but all of impor- tance to the advancement of the ideas. one person who has contributed broadly to the expanse of mod- ern studies of this model by helping to build the foundation of our knowledge of its natural history – either through his own research or by synthesising the knowledge gained by the efforts of other biolo- gists – is professor robert j. wootton. professor wootton has written or edited eight books or monographs concentrated on ﬁsh biology, two of which are devoted speciﬁcally to the biology of stickleback ﬁshes (wootton 1976, 1984). his book entitled ecology of teleost fishes (wootton 1990) has been widely cited and used as a text at many insti- tutions. in addition, he has authored 98 scientiﬁc papers or book chapters. although many of his contri- butions extend to other teleost ﬁshes and to other taxa, the majority have focused on the threespine stickle- back. among these papers, wootton (2009) provided an insightful history of evolutionary studies on the threespine stickleback, in which he detailed the contri- butions of many scientists in broad sweeps of research history. professor wootton’s own contributions began as the main themes of research on the threespine stickleback were established in 1970. the foci of pro- fessor wootton’s research were reproductive behav- iour and life history, especially the energetics of reproduction. these studies provided a foundation for and a stimulus to further research in these focal areas. moreover, the many contributions from professor wootton played an important role in the development of the threespine stickleback as a supermodel. professor wootton served this journal, ecology of freshwater fish, admirably as a member of the edito- rial board for 20 years. he has retired from full-time correspondence: david c. heins, department of ecology and evolutionary biology, 400 lindy boggs building, tulane university, new orleans, la 70118, usa. e-mail: heins@tulane.edu doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2012.00571.x 1 letter service to the university of aberystwyth and from this journal. in recognition of his signiﬁcant contribu- tions to ﬁsh ecology, to our knowledge of the three- spine stickleback, and to this journal, professor wootton is hereby named editorial board member emeritus. references gibson, g. 2005. the synthesis and evolution of a supermodel. science 307: 1890–1891. wootton, r.j. 1976. the biology of the sticklebacks. london: academic press, 387 pp. wootton, r.j. 1984. a functional biology of the sticklebacks. london: croom helm, 265 pp. wootton, r.j. 1990. ecology of teleost ﬁshes. new york: chapman & hall, 404 pp. wootton, r.j. 2009. the darwinian stickleback gasterosteus aculeatus: a history of evolutionary studies. journal of fish biology 75: 1919–1942. 2  