ecology of freshwater fish 2012: 21: 617–626 printed in malaysia  all rights reserved ó 2012 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish differential saturation of paciﬁc northwest and southeast (usa) ﬁsh assemblages daniel j. mcgarvey center for environmental studies, virginia commonwealth university, richmond, va usa accepted for publication june 7, 2012 abstract – plots of local versus regional richness have been used to test whether assemblages are ‘saturated’ with species. however, the validity of these tests is limited by scale-dependence and arbitrarily deﬁned sampling units, statistical autocorrelation between local and regional richness data, and the confounding effects of propagule pressure. in this study, local versus regional richness plots were used to test the saturation hypothesis for paciﬁc northwest and southeast (usa) ﬁsh assemblages, taking care to account for each of the above problems. speciﬁcally, longitudinal river zones were used to ensure that the regional sampling units were not scale-dependent or biologically arbitrary. a log-ratio transformation was used to remove autocorrelation from the local and regional richness data. and a comprehensive ﬁsh stocking database was used to account for propagule pressure. results suggest that the paciﬁc northwest ﬁsh assemblages, which have low native richness, are not saturated, but the species-rich southeast assemblages are at or approaching saturation. key words: local versus regional richness; regional species pool; non-native species; propagule pressure; longitudinal zonation introduction nonnative ﬁshes are rapidly becoming established in u.s. freshwaters (mitchell & knouft 2009). so far, nonnative ﬁsh invasions have tended to outpace native extirpations in the united states, and the net effect has been one of homogenisation; overall rich- ness has increased while differences between ﬁsh assemblages have decreased (rahel 2000). but non- native invasions have not occurred at equal rates throughout the united states. they are most common in the west, where native ﬁsh richness is relatively low (schade & bonar 2005). in the east, where native ﬁsh richness is higher, nonnative invasions are less prevalent (gido & brown 1999). noting that numbers of native and nonnative ﬁsh species are often inversely correlated within a given system (see ross 1991; gido & brown 1999), some researchers have suggested that biotic resistance may be a key determinant of invasion success (e.g., tonn et al. 1990; angermeier & winston 1998). the underlying assumption is that all else being equal, correspondence: d. j. mcgarvey, center for environmental studies, virginia commonwealth university, 1000 west cary street, richmond, va 23284-3050, usa. e-mail: djmcgarvey@vcu.edu doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2012.00583.x 617 that interspeciﬁc competition for limiting resources should be more intense in systems with many resident, native species than in systems with few native spe- cies (kennedy et al. 2002). in this way, nonnative species are more likely to survive and become estab- lished in species-poor systems. by the same logic, richness may increase over time until a system reaches its carrying capacity and becomes effectively ‘saturated’ with species (case 1990). local versus regional richness (lrr) plots are simple tools that have been used to test the satura- tion hypothesis for a variety of freshwater ﬁsh assemblages (e.g., angermeier & winston 1998; oberdorff et al. 1998). lrr plots model average local richness (dependent variable) as a function of the total richness within a larger region (indepen- dent variable). by convention, an asymptotic or curvilinear lrr model indicates that local richness is constrained by locally realised processes, such as interspeciﬁc competition, and that local assem- blages are saturated. alternatively, a linear lrr model local communities may be suggests mcgarvey (a) w u j b c t n 200 km (b) s s e n h c i r s e i c e p s 120 80 40 0 1000 750 500 250 0 d i s c h a r g e ( m 3 / s ) u w j b c t fig. 1. (a) map of the six study basins, in the states of oregon (or) and alabama (al). north-west rivers include the umpqua (u; basin area = 12,133 km2), willamette (w; area = 29,728 km2) and john day (j; area = 20,980 km2). south-east rivers include the black war- rior (b; area = 16,252 km2), cahaba (c; area = 4730 km2) and tallapoosa (t; area = 12,108 km2). the or and al maps are plotted at a common scale. (b) fish species richness and discharge in each river basin. numbers of native and nonnative species in each basin are illus- trated by black and white bars, respectively. grey bars show mean annual discharge near the mouth of each river. richness data were obtained from boschung & mayden (2004), mcgarvey & hughes (2008) and mcgarvey and ward (2008). discharge data were obtained from the u.s. geological survey (http://water.usgs.gov/). random subsets of a larger pool of potential colo- nists – the regional species pool (rsp) – and are therefore unsaturated (cornell 1999). unfortunately, traditional lrr models are limited by several conceptual and statistical problems, three of which are addressed here. first, lrr results are often scale-dependent and prone to bias when biologically arbitrary deﬁnitions of local and/or regional assemblages are used (srivastava 1999; loreau 2000). investigators must therefore use expli- cit, biologically defensible criteria to delineate local and regional assemblages (see ‘estimating regional and local richness’ below). second, standard regres- sion methods should not be used to analyse the lrr relationship because local and regional richness are local autocorrleated; by deﬁnition, richness will always be less than or equal to regional richness 618 are introduced or where (cresswell et al. 1995). a statistical tool to remove this autocorrelation is therefore needed (see szava- kovats et al. 2012). third, low numbers of nonnative species may reﬂect biotic resistance or saturation, but they may also be artefacts of low propagule pressure. on average, nonnative species are more likely to become established in systems where many nonnative individuals repetitive nonnative introductions, such as stocking events, occur is high; marchetti et al. 2004; leprieur et al. 2008). thus, one should not infer that a given assemblage is satu- rated and therefore resistant to invasion without ﬁrst verifying that it has been exposed to a moderate to high level of propagule pressure (gido & brown 1999). low propagule pressure weakens support for the saturation hypothesis. (i.e., where propagule pressure in this study, i use improved lrr methods to address each of the above problems and test the sat- uration hypothesis for ﬁsh assemblages in paciﬁc northwest and southeast u.s. rivers. i begin by using longitudinal river zones, which are character- ised by co-occurring species within relatively homogenous environments, to estimate regional rich- ness (see ‘estimating regional and local richness’ below). next, i use the log-ratio transformation of szava-kovats et al. (2012) to account for autocorre- lation in the local and regional richness data, thereby ensuring that the lrr results are statisti- cally valid. i then use a national ﬁsh stocking data- base (halverson 2008) to assess whether the lrr results may be artefacts of differential propagule pressure. northwest and southeast rivers were cho- sen because they exhibit a strong gradient in ﬁsh diversity, with higher native richness in southeast rivers, and this gradient reﬂects the disparate envi- ronmental histories of two biogeographical regions. southeast u.s. rivers are relatively stable environments with low historical extinction rates, while northwest u.s. rivers are historically unstable environments where numerous extinctions have occurred (smith 1981; moyle & herbold 1987). i the southeast ﬁsh assemblages are at or near saturation, while the northwest ﬁsh assemblages are not. therefore hypothesised that the material and methods study sites the northwest the interregional three paciﬁc northwest (umpqua, willamette and john day) and three southeast (black warrior, cahaba and tallapoosa) rivers were included in this study (fig. 1a). these rivers were chosen because trend in ﬁsh richness they reﬂect described above: rivers have low native ﬁsh richness and high nonnative richness, rivers have high native ﬁsh while the southeast and low nonnative richness (fig. 1b). notably, this disparity in native richness is not a simple effect of river size. the relatively depauper- ate northwest rivers are comparable to or larger than the more diverse southeast rivers, both in terms of and river discharge (fig. 1b). thus, the interregional differences cannot be attributed to a simple species-area or species- discharge effect. total basin area richness estimating regional and local richness the ﬁrst step that must be undertaken in an lrr study is to characterise the rsp in a biologically meaningful way. by deﬁnition, the rsp should fish assemblage saturation these 1998). however, include only those species that are physically capable of migrating to and surviving in a typical locality within a given region, or would be in the absence of interspeciﬁc competition and predation (srivastava 1999). fish studies have often used geographical units such as river basins, physiographical provinces or lakes as rsps (e.g., grifﬁths 1997; angermeier & winston units will overestimate the true size of the rsp if they combine species that have disparate habitat requirements or are otherwise unlikely to co-occur. for instance, a distinct longitudinal gradient in ﬁsh species’ distribu- tions and turnover was reported by li et al. (1987; see their fig. 24.2) rivers. strong gradients and discontinuities, such as high species turnover at the fall line, also exist in south- east rivers (e.g., mettee et al. 1996). lrr studies that use large river basins as rsps without accounting for species’ turnover within basins may therefore overestimate the true size of the rsp. for paciﬁc northwest complete longitudinal zones can potentially solve this problem. when examined at large spatial scales, such as river basins, many riverine ﬁsh assemblages can be divided into a series of adjacent, zonal subassemblages (huet 1959; hawkes 1975). zonal structure is quantiﬁed using multivariate ordi- nations or clustering algorithms to locate longitudinal discontinuities in assemblage structure (mcgarvey & ward 2008). adjacent locations that exhibit high turnover in species composition are indicative of zone boundaries, while locations between zone boundaries have comparatively similar assemblage structure. longitudinal zones typically range from 10 to 100 km in length (e.g., balon & stewart 1983) and are often congruent with longitudinal transitions in physical habitat variables, such as water tempera- ture composition (hawkes 1975; statzner & borchardt 1992; lamouroux et al. 2002). thus, longitudinal zones consist of species that co-occur within relatively uniform environments. and substrate similar zonation patterns have been described in each of the six rivers considered here. using exten- sive ﬁsh assemblage data and common statistical methods, mcgarvey & hughes (2008) and mcgar- vey & ward (2008) detected ‘upper’, ‘middle’ and ‘lower’ zones in each of the paciﬁc northwest and southeast rivers. in each river, the succession from upper to middle to lower ﬁsh zones coincided with a transition from small, cool, high-gradient environ- ments with few resident species to large, warm, low-gradient habitats with comparatively rich, mixed ﬁsh assemblages. zones were also of similar size among biogeographical regions. for example, mean wetted channel widths were, respectively, 11, 42 and 106 m in the upper, middle and lower zones of the northwest rivers and 8, 38 and 99 m in the upper, 619 mcgarvey dolomieu the southeast sculpins (cottus sp.) and cutthroat middle and lower zones of rivers. upper zone ﬁsh assemblages were composed primar- ily of trout (oncorhynchus clarki) in the northwest rivers and small-bodied minnows (e.g., cyprinella sp. and notropis sp.), sunﬁshes (lepomis sp.) and darters (etheostoma sp.) in the southeast rivers. lower-zone ﬁshes in the northwest rivers included large-bodied species such as white sturgeon (acipenser transmont- anus), largescale sucker (catostomus macrocheilus) and northern pikeminnow (ptychocheilus oregonen- sis), in addition to small cyprinids (e.g., acrocheilus alutaceus, richardsonius balteatus and rhinichthys sp.) and a large number of nonnative sunﬁshes (micropterus and catﬁshes (ictalurus punctatus and ameiurus sp.). characteristic species in the lower zones of the southeast rivers included bowﬁn (amia calva), pad- dleﬁsh (polyodon spathula), (e.g., carpiodes sp. and moxostoma sp.), centrarchids (micropterus sp., lepomis sp. and pomoxis sp.), esocids (esox americanus and e. niger), catﬁshes (pylodictis olivaris, ameiurus sp. and ictalurus sp.), gars (lepisosteus sp.), temperate basses (morone sp.), freshwater drum (aplodinotus grunniens) and clupe- ids (alosa sp. and dorosoma sp.), in addition to many cyprinids (e.g., cyprinella sp. and notropis sp.) and percids (sander vitreus, ammocrypta sp., etheostoma sp. and percina sp.). complete descrip- tions of the zonal ﬁsh assemblages and all data sources are provided in mcgarvey & hughes (2008) and mcgarvey & ward (2008). and lepomis large suckers sp.) in each of the northwest and southeast rivers, longitudinal zones satisﬁed the functional rsp crite- ria – species with overlapping distributions that could potentially co-occur at a given locality (srivastava 1999) – better than complete river basins. in other systems, the use of complete river basins as rsps has been justiﬁed. for example, matthews & robison (1998) used small, headwater drainage basins within the ozark and ouachita highlands (arkansas) as rsps, noting that these basins contained high-gradi- ent, clear-water habitats that ﬂowed into and were bounded by low-gradient, turbid rivers; ﬁshes within the highland streams were free to move throughout them but were unlikely to enter turbid rivers further downstream. however, using complete river basins as rsps in the northwest and southeast rivers would have pooled many species with disjunct ranges, thereby inﬂating the sizes of the rsps. i therefore used longitudinal zones as rsps and, in each zone, estimated regional richness as the sum of all species known to occur within the zone. to estimate local richness, i began with the local ﬁsh assemblage deﬁnition of matthews (1998, p. 2): ‘ﬁsh that occur together in a single place, such that 620 they have at least a reasonable opportunity for daily contact with each other’. by this deﬁnition, i assumed that conventional ﬁeld samples could be used as indi- cators of local ﬁsh assemblage structure and richness. speciﬁcally, i used ﬁeld samples from the u.s. envi- ronmental protection agency’s environmental moni- toring and assessment program and the alabama geological survey to characterise local ﬁsh assem- blage structure in the northwest and southeast rivers, respectively. fish sampling methods used in each of these programmes were standardised by habitat type: single-pass backpack electroﬁshing was used in shallow, wadeable habitats and boat electroﬁshing was used in nonwadeable habitats. sampling effort was also similar among sites and biogeographical regions, with most sampling events lasting between 45 and 90 min (total and encompassing ~409 the mean channel width (see mcgarvey & hughes (2008), mcgarvey & ward (2008) and references therein). additionally, post hoc data analysis tools, such as species accumula- tion curves, were used to verify that the standardised ﬁeld samples provided reliable, asymptotic estimates of instance, reynolds et al. (2003) and paller (1995) showed that standardised ﬁeld protocols consistently captured  90% of all ﬁsh species that were locally present in northwest and southeast streams, respectively. for these rea- sons, i was conﬁdent that the standardised ﬁeld sam- ples could be used to identify ﬁshes that potentially interact on a daily, real-time basis (i.e., to deﬁne local assemblages). electroﬁshing time) richness. for local local richness was then estimated within each longitudinal zone, or rsp, by calculating the mean richness of 10 randomly selected ﬁeld samples. this resulted in nine lrr data points (3 zones 9 3 rivers) in each of the two biogeographical regions. multiple ﬁeld samples were combined into a single local rich- ness average to avoid pseudoreplication; individual samples collected within a common rsp are spatially correlated and will therefore introduce a source of bias when treated as independent replicates in regres- sion analyses (srivastava 1999). by averaging ﬁeld samples, the among-sample variability in my lrr analyses with- out introducing spatial bias. error bars (±1 standard deviation) were also included in the lrr plots as measures of among-sample variability. i was able to incorporate some of log-ratio transformation the original lrr method used ordinary least squares regression of untransformed data to ﬁrst test whether a signiﬁcant linear relationship existed between local and regional richness and then to test whether a qua- dratic term signiﬁcantly improved the ﬁt of the model fish assemblage saturation northwest – all species 12 r2 < 0.01 p = 0.94 l s 8 4 0 2.0 2.5 3.0 ln (sr) 3.5 4.0 0 20 40 60 sr northwest – native species only r2 = 0.34 p = 0.10 2.0 2.5 3.5 4.0 3.0 ln (sr) l s 12 8 4 0 0 20 40 60 sr southeast – all species 30 r2 = 0.55 p = 0.02 l s 20 10 0 0 50 100 150 sr 3.0 3.5 4.5 5.0 4.0 ln (sr) southeast – native species only r2 = 0.54 p = 0.03 3.0 3.5 4.5 5.0 4.0 ln (sr) l s 30 20 10 0 0 50 100 150 sr ) ] l s - r s [ ÷  l s ( n l ) ] l s -  r s [ ÷  l s ( n l ) ] l s -  r s [ ÷  l s ( n l ) ] l s -  r s [ ÷  l s ( n l 0.0 –0.4 –0.8 –1.2 –1.6 –2.0 0.0 –0.4 –0.8 –1.2 –1.6 –2.0 0.0 –0.4 –0.8 –1.2 –1.6 –2.0 0.0 –0.4 –0.8 –1.2 –1.6 –2.0 fig. 2. local (sl) versus regional richness (sr) plots for northwest and southeast rivers. plots are shown for complete species lists (‘all species’) and for species lists that did not include nonnative ﬁshes (‘native species only’). log-ratio-transformed sl and sr data are shown on the left, and the untransformed arithmetic data are shown on the right. each data point reﬂects a discrete longitudinal zone or regional species pool. upper, middle and lower zones are indicated by grey diamonds, white circles, and black squares, respectively. sl estimates are the mean averages of 10 randomly selected ﬁeld samples within each zone; vertical error bars are ±1 standard deviation in local richness. (i.e., whether the relationship was asymptotic; cor- nell 1999). however, this method was biased because untransformed local and regional richness data are autocorrelated. local richness is always a subset of, and therefore less than or equal to, regional richness. this autocorrelation ensures that the resulting lrr relationship will be constrained to a ‘wedge-shaped’ area in arithmetic space (i.e., the area below the 1:1 line in lrr plots), thereby invalidating ordinary regression results (cresswell et al. 1995). szava-kovats et al. (2012) solved this problem with a log-ratio transformation. they ﬁrst partitioned regional into two additive components: a-diversity (local richness) and b-diversity (regional – richness 621 mcgarvey local richness). next, they used an additive log-ratio transformation to generate the unconstrained, statisti- cally independent function y = ln(a-diversity/b-diver- sity). finally, they plotted y against the natural log of regional richness and used least squares regression to model the relationship. this allowed them to deter- mine whether local richness was a relative, rather than absolute, function of regional richness. signiﬁcantly negative slopes provided unbiased evidence of asymptotic lrr relationships (in arithmetic space) while nonsigniﬁcant or zero-slope models were indicative of linear, unsaturated lrr relationships (see fig. 1 in szava-kovats et al. 2012). i used this method to perform unbiased lrr tests for the paciﬁc northwest and southeast ﬁsh data. propagule pressure large numbers of nonnative species may create the impression that abundant, unoccupied niche space is available within a given system and that native low assemblages are unsaturated. alternatively, numbers of nonnative species suggests that little unoccupied niche space is available and that native assemblages are saturated. but a valid test of the sat- uration hypothesis cannot be performed without ﬁrst accounting for propagule pressure; one cannot prove that an assemblage is invasion resistant without ﬁrst documenting that in fact been attempted (see introduction; gido & brown 1999). invasions have an index of propagule pressure i used the ﬁsh stocking data of halverson (2008) in paciﬁc as northwest and southeast rivers. halverson (2008) compiled all stocking efforts by state and federal table 1. total numbers (91000 individuals) and biomasses (91000 kg) of ﬁshes stocked in western and southern u.s. states in 2004. western states† southern states‡ number biomass number biomass all species non-native species within study rivers without walleye 424,820 85,582 10,805 310 111,767 13,344 2,684 1,742 6576 288 – – ‘all species’ data are inclusive of all stocked ﬁshes. ‘non-native species within study rivers data are speciﬁc to non-native ﬁshes that are stocked in the paciﬁc northwest study basins (umpqua, willamette john day) or the southeast study basins (black warrior, cahaba, tallapoosa). adjusted ‘without walleye’ numbers are not shown for the southern states because walleye are native to the three southeast rivers. all stocking data are from halverson (2008). †western states include oregon, washington, alaska, california, nevada, arizona, new mexico, utah, colorado, wyoming, idaho, montana, and hawaii. ‡southern states include alabama, mississippi, louisiana, texas, okla- homa, arkansas, florida, georgia, south carolina, north carolina, tennes- see, virginia, west virginia, kentucky, and maryland. 622 agencies in 2004, including total numbers of individ- uals and total biomasses stocked, and summarised these data by species and region (western, southern, north central, and north-eastern states). by comparing the numbers and biomasses of ﬁshes stocked in western and southern states, i tested whether propa- gule pressure differs between the two biogeographical regions. these results were then combined with the lrr test results to assess the overall strength of evidence for the saturation hypothesis. if the lrr test results indicate saturation and the stocking data indicate high propagule pressure, support the saturation hypothesis is increased. however, if the lrr results reﬂect saturation but the stocking data do not indicate high propagule pressure, support for the saturation hypothesis is weakened. for results when the log-ratio transformed lrr data were plot- ted for paciﬁc northwest ﬁshes, i observed little or no evidence of a signiﬁcant relationship, negative or otherwise (p  0.10; fig. 2 upper panel). this was the case when all species were included in the lrr analyses and when only native species were included. accordingly, the untransformed lrr plots (i.e., local and regional richness plotted in arithmetic space) were linear, rather than asymptotic, and provided no evi- dence for the saturation hypothesis. however, the lrr analyses did suggest the southeast ﬁsh assemblages may be at or approaching saturation. both the all-species data set and the native-species- only data set exhibited signiﬁcant, negative relation- ships when the log-ratio transformation was applied to the lrr data (fig. 2 lower panel). the corresponding arithmetic lrr plots therefore exhibited signiﬁcant curvature for southeast ﬁshes. that when all species were considered, ﬁsh stocking effort in the western united states exceeded that in the southern united states by an approximately 4:1 margin, both in terms of total numbers of individuals and total biomass (table 1). however, these ﬁgures were potentially misleading because many of these ﬁshes were native to the systems they were stocked in and should not be included in indices of nonnative propagule pressure. for example, ~50% of the ﬁshes stocked in the western united states were native sal- mon, and ~70% of the ﬁshes stocked in the southern united states were native sunﬁshes (halverson 2008). when the stocking effort data were limited to nonnative species that are known to occur in at least one of the six study rivers (fig. 1a), the number of individuals stocked in the western united states still exceeded the number stocked in the southern united states, but the total biomass of stocked ﬁshes was greater in the southern united states (table 1). the three paciﬁc northwest furthermore, walleye (s. vitreus) comprised >90% of the remaining stocking effort in the western united states. but of rivers included in this study, walleye are only known to occur in the lower zone of the willamette river, and they are generally rare within this zone (see mcgar- vey & hughes 2008). when walleye were removed from the western stocking data, both the numbers and biomasses of stocked nonnative ﬁshes were greater in the southern united states than in the western unites states. thus, the data of halverson (2008) suggest that nonnative propagule pressure is not greater in paciﬁc northwest rivers than in southeast rivers. this in turn supports the hypothesis that northwest rivers, which contain many nonnative ﬁshes, are not satu- rated while southeast rivers, which contain relatively few nonnative ﬁshes, are at or near saturation. discussion this study is, to my knowledge, the ﬁrst to use lrr plots to test for differential saturation of riverine ﬁsh assemblages in two distinct biogeographical regions (but see tonn et al. 1990 and grifﬁths 1997 for lacus- trine comparisons). lrr plots revealed no evidence of saturation within paciﬁc northwest ﬁsh assemblages, but did support the saturation hypothesis for southeast ﬁsh assemblages (fig. 2). moreover, these results were robust to methodological problems associated with previous lrr studies. the regional richness esti- mates, which were derived from longitudinal river zones, and the local richness estimates, which were derived from standardised ﬁeld samples, were based on explicit biological criteria and did not require the use of arbitrary spatial units (srivastava 1999; loreau 2000). the log-ratio transformation of szava-kovats et al. (2012) corrected for statistical autocorrelation between local and regional richness (cresswell et al. 1995). and the ﬁsh stocking data of halverson (2008) supported the lrr results by indicating that nonnative propagule pressure is at least as strong in the south- east rivers as the northwest rivers (table 1). the differential saturation results are intuitive when placed in a historical context. since the pleisto- cene (<2 mya), paciﬁc northwest ﬁshes have endured multiple catastrophic disturbances. massive ﬂoods, caused by the failure of glacial dams, have inundated and scoured the landscape, while faulting, uplift and volcanism continue to degrade basin divides and alter the directionality and connectivity of stream networks (smith 1981; minckley et al. 1986). these distur- bances are thought to have prevented paciﬁc north- west ﬁsh assemblages from achieving equilibrium (smith 1981; li et al. 1987) and are therefore a parsimonious explanation for their apparent lack of saturation, as saturation is not expected within fish assemblage saturation to equilibrium and/or nonequilibrium systems (wiens 1984; mouquet et al. 2003). southeast rivers have, however, been compar- atively stable environments with low extinction rates since the late miocene (~5 mya; smith 1981; swift et al. 1986). thus, southeast ﬁsh assemblages should be closer saturation than northwest assemblages (wiens 1984; moyle & her- bold 1987). interestingly, this historical interpretation of the lrr results is consistent with the study of mouquet et al. (2003). they used niche colonisation simulatioins to test whether historical assembly time and environmental stability have predictable effects intermediate stages of on lrr relationship. at development, when environmental stability was their simulations predicted a linear relatively low, lrr relationship. over longer time horizons, how- ever, environmental stability increased and the pre- dicted lrr relationship became asymptotic. short species’ characteristics within the northwest and southeast rivers were also consistent with moyle & herbold’s (1987) predictions for western and eastern u.s. ﬁsh assemblages. the northwest assemblages long-lived (2+ years) species include many large, with high fecundity, long reproductive spans and large home ranges or strong migratory tendencies (e.g., largescale sucker and northern pikeminnow), while the southeast assemblages include a greater proportion of small-bodied, short-lived species with comparatively low fecundity, reproductive spans and small home ranges or weak migratory ten- dencies (e.g., etheostoma sp. and notropis sp.). this general agreement with the predicted, interregional trends in species’ morphologies and life histories (moyle & herbold 1987) suggests that the observed lrr patterns may be broadly representative of northwest and southeast ﬁsh assemblages. these results also have implications the conservation and management of north american freshwater ﬁshes. ecological theory predicts that saturated assemblages are regulated by deterministic processes at local scales, such as interspeciﬁc compe- tition, while unsaturated assemblages are governed by regional-scale processes, such as immigration and extinction (cornell 1999). accordingly, if southeast ﬁsh assemblages effective truly saturated, conservation plans will need to protect limiting resources, such as habitat and food, on a per-species basis. failure to do so may tip the balance in favour of an interspeciﬁc competitor (wiens 1984; matthews 1998). but ﬁsh assemblages should beneﬁt more from strategies that facilitate landscape-scale movement (cornell 1999). for instance, many northwest ﬁshes are migratory or exhibit metapopulation structure (e.g., cooper & facilitate upstream– mangel 1999). policies downstream movement, perhaps via enhanced dam unsaturated northwest that are the for 623 mcgarvey passage, might therefore be more effective than local, in-stream habitat improvements. one limitation of this study is the relatively small sample size. nine paired local and regional richness estimates were included in each lrr plot. these data were sufﬁcient to test for an overall lrr relationship in each biogeographical region, but not to test for secondary inﬂuences, such as zone (i.e., habitat) type. this is important because the lrr plots indicate a strong zone effect in the southeast rivers. in both the all-species and the native-species-only lrr plots, the asymptotic lrr relationship (arithmetic data) was a clear function of among-zone (i.e., upper ? middle ? lower zone) increases in local and regional richness (fig. 2 lower panel). within zones, there was no evidence of a signiﬁcant lrr relationship, asymptotic or otherwise; zones were tightly clustered in the southeast lrr plots with little vertical (local richness) or horizontal (regional richness) variation. zone effects were less apparent in the northwest riv- ers; local and regional richness were lowest in the upper zones, but richness levels were comparable in the middle and upper zones (fig. 2 upper panel). resolving the effects of zone type will require addi- tional data from rivers in each biogeographical region. however, tests for zone effects on the lrr relationship will not change the fundamental conclu- sion of this study: the ratio of local:regional richness is nearly constant (linear lrr relationship) in north- west rivers, but it decreases in a predictable manner (asymptotic lrr relationship) as one moves down- stream in the southeast rivers. interspeciﬁc the observed lrr relationships could also be inﬂuenced by species’ characteristics that have little to do with direct, interactions. a fundamental assumption of the lrr method is that all species within a given rsp are functionally or ecolog- ically equivalent and therefore equally likely to occur at any given locality (srivastava 1999). if this assump- tion is violated, lrr patterns may be misleading. for example, if ﬁshes in the southeast are, on average, less mobile than ﬁshes in the northwest, then it is less likely a given southeast species will be sampled and included in a local richness estimate, regardless of interspeciﬁc competition. thus, a relatively low num- ber of co-occurring species at a given locality may reﬂect competitive exclusion of some species within the rsp, but it may also reﬂect the specialised, nonin- teractive habitat requirements of species with limited vagility. this is a particular concern because, as noted above, migratory behaviours and large home ranges are more common among northwest than southeast ﬁshes (see moyle & herbold 1987). a natural next step would therefore be to partition the local and regional richness data into groups of species with comparable vagilities. similarly, lrr plots that focus 624 on speciﬁc functional groups, such as large piscivores or benthic insectivores (i.e., species that are most likely to compete), could enhance the current results (matthews & robison 1998). a third caveat of the differential saturation conclu- sion is the fact that native eastern, warm-water ﬁshes, such as smallmouth bass (m. dolomieu), often thrive when introduced to impounded systems in the west. but native western, cold-water ﬁshes, such as rain- bow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss), are less likely to encounter suitable habitats in eastern rivers (gido & brown 1999). this makes it difﬁcult to determine whether the success of nonnative ﬁshes in paciﬁc northwest rivers is because of a lack of biotic resistance per se or because of a selective advantage created by warm-water, lentic impoundments (march- etti et al. 2004). for the moment, i suggest that the nonnative trends shown here are not an acute effect of impoundments because none of the northwest ﬁsh samples was collected in reservoirs (see mcgarvey & hughes 2008). a systematic method to remove the confounding effects of impoundments (or other habi- tat alterations) would, however, greatly beneﬁt studies of ﬁsh assemblage saturation. regions. the subunits that the propagule pressure results should also be interpreted with caution. halverson (2008) summar- ised the ﬁsh stocking data by large geographical regions (groups of 10–15 states) and did not provide stocking data for individual states or major river basins. it was therefore necessary to assume that the summarised western and southern stocking data were broadly representative of they that stocking effort was equally encompassed or distributed within geographical this assumption was not valid and stocking trends in the six study rivers deviated from the broader regional trends, the assertion that the differential numbers of nonnative ﬁshes in paciﬁc northwest and southeast rivers are not an artefact of propagule pressure may be incorrect. i also assumed that the 2004 stocking data of halverson (2008) were representative of his- torical trends and that the deliberate stocking activi- ties of state and federal agencies were the primary sources of nonnative propagule pressure. clearly, a more precise assessment of propagule pressure should be a priority in future research. but few studies have measured propagule pressure directly, and i submit that the current analysis is a useful starting point. if additional lines of evidence are now needed to corroborate or refute the differential saturation results. for example, the hypothesis that southeast ﬁsh assemblages are saturated and therefore governed by interactive processes, while paciﬁc northwest ﬁsh assemblages are not, could be tested directly with in situ competition experiments. but without a broader context to place those experiments in, it may be difﬁcult to distinguish meaningful patterns from idiosyncratic results (matthews 1998). the differen- tial saturation results shown in fig. 2 provide this broader context and can serve as the foundation of a to determine whether more comprehensive effort upper freshwater ﬁsh assemblages do, in fact, exist. to the richness of limits acknowledgements thanks to pat o’neil, scott mettee, doug markle, thom whit- tier, frank pezold, jon armbruster and the late j. malcolm pierson for help in assembling the regional ﬁsh data sets. valuable comments on the manuscript were provided by rob- ert hughes, albrey arrington, milt ward, diane srivastava, denis white, bernard hugueny and two anonymous review- ers. financial support was provided by the national science foundation (nsf/igert grant dge9972810), the us environmental protection agency (star fellowship) and the national fish and wildlife foundation (budweiser conservation scholarship). references angermeier, p.l. & winston, m.r. 1998. local vs. regional inﬂuences on local diversity in stream ﬁsh communities of virginia. ecology 79: 911–927. balon, e.k. & stewart, d.j. 1983. fish assemblages in a river with unusual gradient (luongo, africa – zaire system), reﬂections on river zonation, and description of another new species. environmental biology of fishes 9: 225–252. boschung, h.t.j. & mayden, r.l. 2004. fishes of alabama. washington, dc: smithsonian books. case, t.j. 1990. invasion resistance arises in strongly inter- acting species-rich model competition communities. pro- ceedings of the national academy of sciences of usa 87: 9610–9614. cooper, a.b. & mangel, m. 1999. the dangers of ignoring metapopulation structure for the conservation of salmonids. fishery bulletin 97: 213–226. cornell, h.v. 1999. unsaturation and regional inﬂuences on species richness in ecological communities: a review of the evidence. ecoscience 6: 303–315. cresswell, j.e., vidal-martinez, v.m. & crichton, n.j. 1995. the investigation of saturation in the species richness of communities: some comments on methodology. oikos 72: 301–304. gido, k.b. & brown, j.h. 1999. invasion of north american drainages by alien ﬁsh species. freshwater biology 42: 387– 399. grifﬁths, d. 1997. local and regional species richness in north american lacustrine ﬁsh. journal of animal ecology 66: 49–56. halverson, m.a. 2008. stocking trends: a quantitative review of governmental ﬁsh stocking in the united states, 1931 to 2004. fisheries 33: 69–75. hawkes, h.a. 1975. river zonation and classiﬁcation. in: whitton, b.a., ed. river ecology. berkley, ca: university of california press, pp. 312–374. fish assemblage saturation huet, m. 1959. proﬁles and biology of western european streams as related to ﬁsh management. transactions of the american fisheries society 88: 155–163. kennedy, t.a., naeem, s., howe, k.m., knops, j.m.h., tilman, d. & reich, p. 2002. biodiversity as a barrier to ecological invasion. nature 417: 636–638. lamouroux, n., poff, n.l. & angermeier, p.l. 2002. intercon- tinental convergence of stream ﬁsh community traits along geomorphic and hydraulic gradients. ecology 83: 1792–1807. leprieur, f., beauchard, o., blanchet, s., oberdorff, t. & brosse, s. 2008. fish invasions in the world’s river systems: when natural processes are blurred by human activities. plos biology 6: e28. li, h.w., schreck, c.b., bond, c.e. & rexstad, e. 1987. factors inﬂuencing changes in ﬁsh assemblages of paciﬁc northwest streams. in: matthews, w.j. & heins, d.c., eds. community and evolutionary ecology of north american stream ﬁshes. norman, ok: university of oklahoma press, pp. 193–202. loreau, m. 2000. are communities saturated? on the relation- ship between alpha, beta and gamma diversity. ecology letters 3: 73–76. marchetti, m.p., moyle, p.b. & levine, r. 2004. alien ﬁshes in california watersheds: characteristics of successful and failed invaders. ecological applications 14: 587–596. matthews, w.j. 1998. patterns in freshwater ﬁsh ecology. new york: chapman and hall. matthews, w.j. & robison, h.w. 1998. inﬂuence of drainage connectivity, drainage area and regional species richness on ﬁshes of the interior highlands in arkansas. the american midland naturalist 139: 1–19. mcgarvey, d.j. & hughes, r.m. 2008. longitudinal zonation of paciﬁc northwest (u.s.a.) ﬁsh assemblages and the spe- cies-discharge relationship. copeia 2008: 311–321. mcgarvey, d.j. & ward, g.m. 2008. scale dependence in the species-discharge relationship for ﬁshes of the southeastern u.s.a. freshwater biology 53: 2206–2219. mettee, m.f., o’neil, p.e. & pierson, j.m. 1996. fishes of alabama and the mobile basin. birmingham, al: oxmoor house. minckley, w.l., hendrickson, d.a. & bond, c.e. 1986. geography of western north american freshwater ﬁshes: description and relationships to intracontinental tectonism. in: hocutt, c.h. & wiley, e.o., eds. the zoogeography of north american freshwater ﬁshes. new york: john wiley and sons, pp. 519–613. mitchell, a. & knouft, j. 2009. non-native ﬁshes and native species diversity in freshwater ﬁsh assemblages across the united states. biological invasions 11: 1441–1450. mouquet, n., munguia, p., kneitel, j.m. & miller, t.e. 2003. community assembly time and the relationship between local and regional species richness. oikos 103: 618–626. moyle, p.b. & herbold, b. 1987. life-history patterns and community structure in stream ﬁshes of western north america: comparisons with eastern north america and eur- ope. in: matthews, w.j. & heins, d.c., eds. community and evolutionary ecology of north american stream ﬁshes. norman, ok: university of oklahoma press, pp. 25–32. oberdorff, t., hugueny, b., compin, a. & belkessam, d. in the coastal 1998. non-interactive ﬁsh communities 625 processes along statzner, b. & borchardt, d. 1992. longitudinal patterns and ecological responses to physical gradients. in: giller, p.s., hildrew, a.g. & rafaelli, d.g., eds. aquatic ecology: scale, pat- tern, and process. oxford: blackwell scientiﬁc publica- tions, pp. 113–140. streams: modeling swift, c.c., gilbert, c.r., bortone, s.a., burgess, g.h. & yerger, r.w. 1986. zoogeography of the freshwater ﬁshes of the southeastern united states: savannah river to lake pontchartrain. in: hocutt, c.h. & wiley, e.o., eds. the zoo- geography of north american freshwater ﬁshes. new york: john wiley and sons, pp. 213–265. szava-kovats, r.c., zobel, m. & pärtel, m. 2012. the local- regional species richness relationship: new perspectives on the null-hypothesis. oikos 121: 321–326. tonn, w.m., magnuson, j.j., rask, m. & toivonen, j. 1990. intercontinental comparison of small-lake ﬁsh assemblages: the balance between local and regional processes. the american naturalist 136: 345–375. wiens, j.a. 1984. on understanding a non-equilibrium world: myth and reality in community patterns and processes. in: strong, d.r., simberloff, d., abele, l.g. & thistle, a.b., eds. ecological communities: conceptual issues and the evidence. princeton, nj: princeton university press, pp. 439–457. mcgarvey streams of north-western france. journal of animal ecology 67: 472–484. paller, m.h. 1995. relationships among number of ﬁsh spe- cies sampled, reach length surveyed, and sampling effort in south carolina coastal plain streams. north american jour- nal of fisheries management 15: 110–120. rahel, f.j. 2000. homogenization of ﬁsh faunas across the united states. science 288: 854–856. reynolds, l., herlihy, a.t., kaufmann, p.r., gregory, s.v. & hughes, r.m. 2003. electroﬁshing effort requirements for assessing species richness and biotic integrity in western oregon streams. north american journal of fisheries man- agement 23: 450–461. ross, s.t. 1991. mechanisms structuring stream ﬁsh assem- blages: are there lessons from introduced species? environ- mental biology of fishes 30: 359–368. schade, c.b. & bonar, s.a. 2005. distribution and abundance of nonnative ﬁshes in streams of the western united states. north american journal of fisheries management 25: 1386– 1394. smith, g.r. 1981. late cenozoic freshwater ﬁshes of north america. annual review of ecology and systematics 12: 163–193. srivastava, d.s. 1999. using local-regional richness plots to test for species saturation: pitfalls and potentials. journal of animal ecology 68: 1–16. 626  