ecology of freshwater fish 2014: 23: 224–233 ó 2013 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish overwinter survival, energy storage and reproductive allocation in the invasive round goby (neogobius melanostomus) from a river system brianna e. houston1, anna c. rooke2, jacob w. brownscombe2,*, michael g. fox3 1biology program, trent university, 1600 west bank drive, peterborough, on k9j 7b8, canada 2environmental and life sciences graduate program, trent university, 1600 west bank drive, peterborough, on k9j 7b8, canada 3environmental and resource studies program and department of biology, trent university, 1600 west bank drive, peterborough, on k9j 7b8, canada accepted for publication april 25, 2013 abstract – the dynamic nature of population density during the invasion process may compromise how a population is able to cope with challenging environmental conditions within their non-native range. in temperate regions, one of the greatest seasonal environmental challenges is winter. we assess overwinter survival, changes in body condition and lipid content, and reproductive allocation of round goby (neogobius melanostomus) from the point of introduction and the leading edges of an expanding invasive population in a tributary of lake ontario. autumn lipid content was highest in round goby from the downstream edge and lowest at the centre of the invasive range, likely due to lower population density and reduced intraspecific resource competition at the expanding edges of its distribution. after 142 days of starvation under simulated winter conditions, round goby exhibited 96% survival. despite the extended starvation period, the majority of females were able to allocate energy into ovarian development, with 60% of females having a gonadosomatic index of >5% at the end of the overwintering period. individuals originating from the downstream edge allocated significantly more energy towards reproduction compared with individuals from the upstream and centre locations. the results suggest that the position within an expanding invasive range can influence the autumn energy content and consequently the reproductive effort of round goby in early spring. high overwinter survival and greater allocation of energy to reproduction at the expanding edge of an invasion may contribute to the highly successful expansion of the round goby in the great lakes basin. key words: gobiidae; invasive species; reproductive allocation; survival; winter introduction invasion by exotic fishes has had major ecological impacts on freshwater lakes and streams, and has led to the decline of native fishes worldwide (light & marchetti 2007; hermoso et al. 2011). invasions are dynamic, and as such, areas previously free of an invasive species can become occupied at high densi- ties. several studies (bøhn et al. 2004; raby et al. 2010; brownscombe & fox 2012) have demon- strated changes in density during the early stages of an invasion; density in more recently invaded areas is lower compared with areas of longer occupation. this change in density as the invasion progresses may be linked to the expression of life-history traits within the invading population through the influence of intraspecific competition and resource availability on growth and fecundity (bøhn et al. 2004; burton et al. 2010). the invasion process and life-history traits that are associ- ated with successful invasive species is important for developing effective management practices and improving our understanding of correspondence: a. c. rooke, environmental and life sciences graduate program, trent university, 1600 west bank drive, peterborough, on k9j 7b8, canada. e-mail: annarooke@trentu.ca *present address: department of biology, carleton university, 1125 colonel by drive ottawa, on k1s 5b6, canada 224 doi: 10.1111/eff.12071 improving our theoretical understanding of the inva- sion process. the round goby (neogobius melanostomus) is an invasive fish species accidentally introduced into the great lakes basin in 1990 and has subsequently col- onised the laurentian great lakes and many of their associated tributaries (charlebois et al. 2001). the rapid spread of round goby is a result of its wide tol- erance of environmental conditions (charlebois et al. 2001) and opportunistic diet (e.g., amphipods, chiron- omids, cladocerans, crayfish, dragonflies, dreissenids, isopods, mayflies, fish eggs and larvae: corkum et al. 2004). north american range expansion of the round goby has been attributed to dispersal of fry (hensler & jude 2007), seasonal dispersal of adults (pennuto et al. 2010; brownscombe & fox 2012) and through suspected bait bucket releases (carman et al. 2006; brown & stepien 2009; brownscombe et al. 2012). round goby are multiple spawners, spawning every 3–4 weeks from april to september (water tempera- ture 9–26 °c: charlebois et al. 1997). the produc- tion of oocytes starts in september (kulikova 1985; cited by charlebois et al. 1997) to prepare for the spawning season the following april. given their reproductive ecology, energy budgeting during the winter months may be an important component to the high reproductive success of the round goby in invaded temperate ecosystems. it the winter behaviour of round goby in its north american range is poorly studied; however, is known that at low temperatures the round goby con- sumes minimal food (lee & johnson 2005). conse- quently, the relatively long, cold winters of the great lakes basin may prove a challenge for the survival and northward expansion of round goby, an exotic species native to the milder climates of the ponto- caspian region, where water temperatures may be warm enough to permit active feeding for most of the year (nikol’skii 1954; cited by charlebois et al. 1997). overwinter mortality of temperate freshwater fish that reduce feeding at low temperatures has been linked to low energy density (rainbow trout, oncorhynchus_mykiss: biro et al. 2004; atlantic sal- mon, salmo_salar: finstad et al. 2004). in regions where winter conditions are cold enough to reduce feeding, these species rely on autumn energy reserves accumulated in the previous growing season for overwinter survival and reproduction in early spring (fiorin et al. 2007). as such, local resource availabil- ity is particularly important to survival and energy allocation strategies in areas with extended winter periods. round goby at the pioneering edge of an invasion benefit from more abundant prey resources compared with those from longer established areas (raby et al. 2010), likely as a result of reduced intraspecific com- overwintering and reproduction in round goby petition associated with low densities at range edges. thus, we anticipated that density-dependent resource competition would influence resource availability, as well as overwinter survival and spring reproductive effort along an invasion pathway. the objectives of this study are to determine whether the location along an invasion pathway influ- ences overwinter survival and energy allocation of round goby. we hypothesised that round goby from recently invaded areas would show differences in pre- winter energy accumulation and consequently, over- winter survival and post-winter gonad development compared with round goby from areas where the spe- cies has been well established. we predicted that round goby at the edges of the invasive pathway would have higher autumn lipid content, higher over- winter survival, superior post-winter body condition and greater post-winter gonad development than indi- viduals from longer established portions of their inva- sion range, as a consequence of differences in round goby density. methods study population and collection sites for this study, we used individuals from a well-docu- mented expanding population of round goby in the trent-severn waterway, a tributary that empties into the bay of quinte, lake ontario. the initial point of introduction (core) in the trent-severn waterway is believed to be in the trent river below rice lake, where round goby were first found in 2003 (fig. 1, raby et al. 2010). it is suspected that the round goby was transferred from lake ontario by a bait bucket and has since spread upstream and downstream from the original point of introduction. using extensive surveys involving angling and beach seining, we determined that the downstream edge (dse) of its distribution in the system had reached percy’s reach in the trent river by 2009, while the upstream edge (use) had advanced north along the otonabee river above rice lake (fig. 1; brownscombe & fox 2012). in november of 2010, round goby were collected by angling or seine (15 9 1.5 m) at surface water temper- atures 5 °c or lower, from the dse (44.23581°n,  77.78330°w), core (44.30842°n,  77.95796°w) and use (44.21555°n,  78.23335°w) sites (fig. 1). the use and dse sites are located inside the absolute edge of the invasion front, as low densities made col- lections at the extreme range edges difficult. at the time of collection, the core site was likely occupied for ~7 years, while the use was occupied for <1 year and the dse just >1 year (brownscombe & fox 2012). the estimated mean abundance of round goby was 225 houston et al. fig. 1. map of the invasion pathway, with upstream edges (ue) and downstream edges (de) of the invasion in the trent-severn waterway marked (circles). collection sites are in bold and are the downstream edge (dse), the invasion point (core) and the upstream edge (use). the edges (1.4 m  2; both considerably lower at upstream and downstream regions) than in the core  2) area, as expected. density estimates are (4.3 m based on the angling removal method in brownscombe & fox (2012) from high-quality round goby habitat (those containing rocky substrate) in may and august 2010 in the core area (n = 46), as well as at the use (n = 70) and dse (n = 43) areas where range expan- sion was occurring from 2009 to 2010. see browns- combe & fox (2012) for locations of each range area. to compare autumn lipid content between sites, a subset of round goby from each site were sacri- ficed upon collection and immediately frozen until later analysis (see below). the remaining individu- als were transported in aerated coolers to trent university, where they were held in large circular tanks in aerated otonabee river water pumped directly into the facility. to assess overwinter sur- vival, gobies were held under simulated winter conditions individuals were laboratory. sexed, measured for length and weight, marked with a unique dorsal spine clip, and distributed in eight replicate 34-l fibreglass flow-through units supplied with fresh otonabee river water (2–6 fish per site = 11 individuals per replicate unit). water temperature in the units remained similar to river temperatures (1–5 °c) throughout the winter period allowing experimental to experience winter conditions similar to wild populations in the trent-severn. flow-through units had natural gravel individuals in the 226 substrate, rock shelters and ice cover simulated with a thin layer of styrofoam. a near-natural photoperiod (10:14 h light:dark) was maintained throughout the winter simulation period. round goby were fed sinking shrimp pellets ad libitum twice per day for the first month after collec- tion, until water temperature was below where feed- ing is expected to occur (~4 °c: lee & johnson 2005). on december 9, additional individuals from the dse and core were sacrificed to determine whether the period of feeding in the laboratory had influenced body lipid content from conditions found in late autumn in the wild. due to low sample num- bers, we were unable to sacrifice gobies from the use population at this time. at this point, feeding was stopped, and gobies were monitored daily. dead gobies were removed from flow-through units within 24 h and immediately frozen for later analysis. the experiment was terminated on 29 april 2011 (a total of 142 days of simulated winter conditions) on account of naturally increasing water temperatures within the river system and the flow-through units. at the end of the experiment, all surviving fish were sacrificed, measured, weighed and immediately fro- zen. body composition analysis fish tissue was dried in a freeze drier for 72 h, ground to a powder using an electric coffee grinder and returned to the freeze drier for 12 additional hours prior to measuring dry weight. lipid content was measured using a petroleum ether extraction technique modified from schultz et al. (1998) and hurst et al. (2000): dry fish tissue was packaged in preweighed filter paper envelopes and extracted with petroleum ether in an automated soxhlet appa- ratus, refluxing for 6 h. after extraction, filter paper packets were placed in a drying oven (60 °c) for 14 h and a desiccating jar overnight prior to mea- suring final dry weight of the packet. lipid weight was calculated by subtracting the dry weight of tis- sue after extraction from that of the tissue prior to extraction. dry weight and lipid mass of body and gonad tissue were measured separately for female gobies surviving simulated winter conditions. body and gonad tissue of females were combined when loss and calculating instantaneous rate of weight comparing the spring. instances where no lipid mass could be detected were treated as having zero lipid mass (~ 28% of all lipid measures: 36/54 spring body tissue and 9/ 32 spring gonad tissue). composition body in statistical analysis total length and wet weight of gobies at the time of collection were compared among sites with analysis of variance and covariance (body length as the covariate), respectively. to assess the influ- ence of position along the invasion pathway on autumn body condition and lipid content, gobies sacrificed immediately after collection were com- pared among all three sites using analysis of covariance, with total length as the covariate. the influence of the feeding period on dry weight and lipid content was also assessed using analysis of covariance by comparing individuals sacrificed at overwintering and reproduction in round goby conditions were simulated winter during also excluded from weight loss analyses. the rate of weight loss was calculated as the instantaneous rate of weight loss (iwl), where the weight at the beginning of the starvation period was estimated using site-specific linear regressions of dry weight and lipid mass on body length from fish sacrificed at the end of the feeding period in the laboratory. a two-way analysis of (with total length as the covariate) was used to assess the effect of location along the invasion front and sex on the instantaneous rate of total dry weight and total lipid loss during the winter period. covariance dry weight of gobies surviving simulated winter conditions was compared among sites with analysis of covariance, whereas lipid mass was compared among sites with analysis of variance, because lipid mass was not strongly correlated with body length in gobies surviving to spring (r = 0.27, p = 0.048). reproductive investment was assessed using the gonadosomatic index (gsi; fox & crivelli 1998), calculated as 100 times the gonad mass, divided by the body mass minus gonad mass (snyder 1983), as well as with the lipid mass within gonad tissue. gsi and lipid content of gonads in females surviving sim- ulated winter conditions were compared among sites using analysis of covariance, with total length as the covariate. all analyses on gobies held in the laboratory were conducted using generalised linear mixed models, with replicate flow-through units included as a ran- dom effect blocking factor. unless specified, interac- tion terms were not significant and covariate terms were significant. data were loge-transformed prior to analysis to meet assumptions of normality and homo- geneity of variance (zar 2010). all statistical analyses were conducted in r 2.13.1 (r development core team 2011). iwl ¼ loge ðestimated weight at the beginning of starvation periodþ loge 142 days of starvation conditions ðweight at end of starvation periodþ the time of collection and those sacrificed after the feeding period for core and dse populations separately. analysis of dry weight and lipid loss during simulated winter conditions was limited to individuals from the dse and core sites, because we were unable to sacrifice gobies origi- nating from the use gobies immediately prior to initiation of starvation conditions, and therefore their body composition at could not predict the beginning of the starvation period. mortalities results autumn dry weight and lipid content in the wild round goby collected in november varied in size from 48 to 121 mm total length and were signifi- cantly length (f2,128 = 10.5, weight (f2,127 = 19.4, p < 0.001, table 1), with gobies at both range edges being larger and heavier than those among p < 0.001) both wet different sites and in 227 houston et al. table 1. mean total length (mm) and wet weight (g) of round goby collected from the trent-severn waterway in november 2010 by site within the invasive range. site use core dse mean length, mm (se) 85.6 (2.9) a 74.5 (1.9) b 86.8 (2.2) a mean wet weight, g (se) 8.2 (0.84) a 5.3 (0.51) b 9.2 (0.75) a no. of individuals autumn collections 12 25 16 post-feeding period overwinter simulation – 12 10 12 20 24 total 24 57 50 use, upstream edge; core, invasion point; dse, downstream edge. letters indicate tukey test comparison of all fish collected in november (all significant comparisons had p < 0.01). the number of individuals from each col- lection site used in autumn and post-feeding comparisons, and overwinter simulation experiment are indicated. or lipid p = 0.30) feeding period in the laboratory. gobies from the dse showed no significant change in dry weight (f1,23 = 1.1, content (f1,23 = 0.011, p = 0.92) during the feeding period. at the beginning of the starvation period, there was no significant difference in dry weight between dse and core gobies (f1,19 = 2.2, p = 0.14); however, dse gobies still had significantly higher lipid content (f1,19 = 8.9, p < 0.01). round gobies from the use were not included, as the body condition prior to star- vation could not be assessed because of small sample size. fig. 2. autumn lipid content of round goby from the core (cir- cles, solid line), use (crosses, small dashes) and dse (triangles, large dashes) sites within the invasion pathway in the trent- severn waterway. round goby collected in november 2010 by angling, see text for site details. lines show least squares best-fit relationship for each collection site. from the core area. dry weight of round goby in late autumn was also significantly different among sites (f2,49 = 14.6, p < 0.001), with dse gobies having significantly higher dry weight than gobies from the use and core sites. autumn lipid content was also significantly different among all sites (f2,49 = 20.2, p < 0.001), with dse gobies having significantly higher than use and core sites, and individuals from the use having significantly higher lipid content than those from the core (fig 2). lipid content effect of feeding period on dry weight and lipid content round gobies from the core significantly increased in dry weight (f1,34 = 8.4, p < 0.01) and lipid con- tent (f1,34 = 7.0, p = 0.012) during the one-month 228 overwinter survival and rate of weight loss over the 142-day period of simulated winter condi- tions, only two gobies (~ 4% of experimental individ- uals) died: a 66-mm (tl) goby from the core on day 130, and a 99-mm goby from the dse on day 134. instantaneous rate of dry weight loss during simulated winter conditions was not significantly dif- ferent between dse and core sites (f1,33 = 0.23, p = 0.63). unlike dry weight loss, instantaneous total lipid loss was higher in gobies from the dse site (f1,33 = 91.1, p < 0.001) compared with gobies from the core (fig. 3). males lost significantly more total dry weight over the winter period than females (f1,33 = 4.63, p = 0.039), while there was no effect of sex on lipid loss (f1,33 = 0.30, p = 0.59). once again, round gobies from the use were not included in weight loss analysis, as body condition prior to starvation could not be estimated. dry weight, lipid content and reproductive investment in spring dry weight (f2,45 = 10.4, p < 0.001) and lipid con- tent (f2,46 = 8.2, p < 0.001) of individuals surviving simulated winter conditions were significantly higher in gobies originating from the dse. the majority of female gobies that survived the winter showed mod- erate ovarian development, and more than half had a gsi >5 per cent. gsi was significantly higher in (a) (b) fig. 3. estimated instantaneous (a) total dry weight and (b) total lipid loss of during simulated winter conditions of round goby from the core (circles), and dse (triangles) sites of their inva- sive range in the trent-severn waterway. solid symbols represent females and open symbols represent males. line shows least squares best-fit relationship for significant differences between (a) sexes (solid = female, dashed = male, location not significant) and (b) collection site (solid = core, dashed = dse, sex not significant). females from the dse compared with both the use and core sites (f2,23 = 18.74, p < 0.001; fig. 4). gonads of dse gobies also had significantly higher lipid content compared with use and core sites (f2,23 = 21.8, p < 0.001). discussion adaptive response to novel environmental and cli- matic conditions is important for non-native species introduced into new climates (kolar & lodge 2002; marchetti et al. 2004). given the important role of overwintering and reproduction in round goby fig. 4. gonadosomatic index (gsi) of female round goby surviv- ing simulated winter conditions, from the core (circles, solid line), use (crosses, small dashes) and dse (triangles, large dashes) sites within the invasive range in the trent-severn water- way. lines show least squares best-fit relationship for each collec- tion site. winter phenology in shaping the ecology of temperate fish populations (shuter et al. 2012), the resiliency of exotic species to winter conditions may have a strong impact on invader success. in particular, exotic spe- cies from warmer climates introduced to colder cli- mates may be more sensitive to the extreme energetic constraints associated with winter starvation condi- tions within the non-native range. regional winter conditions influence the availability of energy for growth and reproduction (garvey & marschall 2003) and therefore are an important factor for the ability of exotic species to spread into regions with colder and longer winters. we anticipated that the relatively long period of winter starvation conditions typical of central ontario would prove challenging for the survival of invasive round goby, given they are native to a region with a milder climate. however, despite 142 days without feeding, we saw high rates of survival with only two mortalities during simulated winter conditions. while additional factors such as predation risk would likely reduce survival of individuals overwintering in the trent-severn, estimates of overwinter survival of wild round goby populations are also quite high: sur- vival as high as 99% has been estimated for wild populations overwintering in the duluth-superior harbor in lake superior (lynch & mensinger 2013). the extended winter conditions of central ontario appear to pose little threat to the survival of invasive adult round goby; however, the winter survival of juvenile round goby is currently unknown. 229 houston et al. during an invasion, life-history traits of the inva- sive population can change quickly, with earlier maturity and faster growth occurring in more recently invaded areas (bøhn et al. 2004; gutowsky & fox 2012). this variability in life-history traits may be a result of reduced predation risk (carlsson et al. 2009; brownscombe & fox 2013), higher resource avail- ability (raby et al. 2010), and fewer parasites (cor- kum et al. 2004; kornis et al. 2012) in recently invaded areas, conditions that allow greater allocation of energy towards growth and reproduction. our results, along with others (bøhn et al. 2004; burton et al. 2010; feiner et al. 2012), suggest that density- dependent resource availability may strongly influ- ence the expression of life-history traits in invading populations. in our study, reduced intraspecific com- petition for food resources at the periphery of the invasion had a role in higher energy allocation towards autumn lipid storage, allowing round goby to overwinter in better condition and have superior allo- cation to reproduction in early spring at expanding range edges. examining energy storage and winter survival at different points along an invasion pathway allows us to understand how energy availability and allocation may influence the dynamic nature of life- history strategies as an invasive species disperses into new territories. because feeding is reduced at cold temperatures, energy storage in late autumn must meet the ener- getic demands of the winter period for a fish to sur- vive. the results of our study support the prediction that gobies at the edges of an invasion have higher autumn lipid content and suggest that higher food availability at the edges of the invasion allows for greater storage of lipids going into winter. higher gut fullness at the periphery of the population compared with the area of introduction (raby et al. 2010) fur- ther supports our hypothesis that density-dependent resource limitation influences local accumulation of winter energy stores across an invasion range. while round goby from both range edges had signif- icantly higher energy stores in autumn than those at the centre, downstream site fish also had higher energy stores than those from the upstream site. this resulted in downstream edge fish having significantly higher gsi at the end of simulated winter conditions than at the other range locations, which had similar gsi. interestingly, in 2008, wild round goby from the downstream edge of their range also had higher gsi than centre and upstream locations across the entire reproductive season (gutowsky & fox 2012). higher reproductive output at range edges is likely due to higher resource availability as a result of reduced intra- specific competition (raby et al. 2010; brownscombe & fox 2012; gutowsky & fox 2012). round goby abundance was very similar between range edges in 230  2); however, the upstream edge had 2010 (~1.4 m much higher abundance than the downstream edge in 2009 (brownscombe & fox 2012). presumably, round gobies at the 2010 range edges originated from some- where within the 2009 range, although it is unclear whether conditions at the previous year’s range edge would influence their energetics in 2010. the mecha- nisms of round goby range expansion may also help explain the observed pattern; assuming that range expansion was natural at both range edges (browns- combe & fox 2012), round gobies actively swam a minimum of ~7 km upstream from the previous upstream edge in 2009 to reach the collection site for fish used in this study by november 2010. meanwhile, downstream range expansion is thought to be driven more by passive transport of larvae (hensler & jude 2007; brownscombe & fox 2012). thus, differences in dispersal mechanisms could present an energetic advantage for round goby at the downstream edge of their expanding range, lipid reserves and reproductive output. resulting in greater during the overwinter period, downstream and centre region gobies lost dry weight at a similar rate, and the relative body condition among upstream, cen- tre and downstream gobies surviving simulated win- ter conditions was similar to that found in autumn field collections, suggesting that autumn body condi- tion dictates spring body condition. round goby at the downstream edge, which had relatively larger lipid stores in the autumn, depleted their lipid stores at a higher rate during the winter period than gobies from the area of original introduction. despite this, round goby from the downstream site still had signif- icantly higher total lipid content in the spring than those taken from the upstream or centre sites. faster rates of lipid depletion during winter were also asso- ciated with higher autumn lipid stores in juvenile atlantic salmon (finstad et al. 2010), resulting in post-winter lipid levels being similar among popula- tions. due to its high energy value and digestibility, lip- ids are typically the first energy stores to be metabo- lised (post & evans 1989); however, a reduction in lipids is indicative that other stored energy forms are also being depleted (kirjasniemi & valtonen 1997; pangle et al. 2004). because lipid content was the only measured energy source in this study, differen- tial use in types of energy stores could explain differ- ences in lipid and dry weight loss during the winter period between the sexes. males lost significantly more dry weight compared with females; however, there was no difference in lipid loss between the sexes. gonad development in female round goby dur- ing the winter would have acted as an additional energetic demand and could account for differences in dry weight and lipid loss between the sexes. females gained gonad mass and reallocated body lipid to gonad tissue, a process not seen in males dur- ing this period. core: starvation conditions, individuals that have higher post-winter energy reserves are able to breed earlier in the spring (schultz et al. 1991), providing early spawned off- spring the advantage of a longer growing season and lower intracohort resource competition. this is con- sistent with the trent-severn population in which gobies from the extreme range edges begin spawning earlier in the season than those from longer occupied areas (l.m. masson, unpublished data). in our study, female round gobies at all sites sampled appear to have had adequate energy stores in autumn to survive an extended winter starvation period and emerge in spring with sufficient energy stores to permit invest- in ovary development. furthermore, despite ment 142 days of experimental round goby maturing in the laboratory were able to allocate energy into ovarian development (mean gsi  se; 3.54%  0.69, use: 4.16%  0.70, dse: 8.99%  0.70) comparable to those seen during mid-spawning season within the trent-severn (gutowsky & fox 2012). female round goby appear to be capable of successful maturation after extended periods of starvation, similar to other capitol-spawning breeders (ex: flatfish (pleuronecti- formes): roff 1982; pacific herring, clupea harengus pallasi: hay et al. 1988); however, impacts of reduced food intake on other reproductive traits, such as egg size (three-spined stickleback, gasterosteus aculeatus: fletcher & wootton 1995; white crappie, pomoxis annularis: bunnell et al. 2007) which were not assessed in our study, may be present. the cold temperatures of north temperate winters may actually benefit early spring reproduction in invasive round goby by reducing the metabolic and maintenance energy costs during the winter, thus leaving greater energy reserves available for immediate investment in gonad development in early spring. round goby from the downstream site had higher gsi and gonad lipid content than those from either the centre or upstream sites, partially supporting our prediction that the edges of the invasion would have higher reproductive allocation in the spring. going into the winter, gobies from the downstream site had higher lipid stores than those from the centre site, allowing individuals from the downstream site to reallocate more lipids from body stores to gonad development (jobling et al. 1998). while there was no significant difference between the upstream and centre sites in gsi or gonad lipid content, the larger body size of gobies in the upstream area (table 1) would still translate into higher absolute reproductive output. furthermore, because we were unable to assess lipid content of upstream fish prior to starva- overwintering and reproduction in round goby tion conditions, we cannot determine how their start- ing lipid content compared with the centre population and affected energy allocation towards reproduction. the relative reproductive investment of gobies over- wintering under simulated winter conditions in this study is consistent with that seen in the wild trent- severn population, with the highest gsi in the down- stream range, and the difference in reproductive investment being more comparable between the upstream edge and the centre sites (gutowsky & fox 2012). our results suggest that higher autumn lipid storage in newly invaded areas may allow individuals to invest more energy in early spring reproduction, and therefore may help explain why gobies at the expanding edges of their invasive range typically have higher reproductive investment compared with those from longer established areas (grul’a et al. 2012; gutowsky & fox 2012). the winter conditions experienced in central ontario do not appear to be sufficient to cause wide- spread mortality in invasive round goby. the amount of energy that gobies were able to store in autumn at all locations along the invasion front was sufficient to survive the overwinter starvation period; however, the position in the invasive range did influence autumn energy stores, with higher lipid stores in round goby from the leading edges of the invasion. higher autumn lipid content in downstream goby appears to allow higher reproductive investment at this site in early spring, suggesting that increased energy availability at the leading edge of an invasion may explain why reproductive investment in newly invaded areas tends to be high. the overwinter sur- vival of young-of-year is likely lower than seen in this study, because winter starvation mortality is typi- cally size dependent (kirjasniemi & valtonen 1997; lappalainen et al. 2000). the northern limits of fish geographic range are limited by survival of juvenile and young-of-year (shuter et al. 1980), and therefore, overwinter survival of juveniles should be considered when assessing the effect of climate on the northward range expansion of the round goby. our research sug- gests that the winter starvation period in central ontario does not impose an energetic constraint on round goby and that current climatic conditions in ontario are unlikely to hinder the northward range expansion of round goby in the near future. acknowledgements the authors wish to thank e. chin, g. burness, t. metcalfe and b. mcilwain for their assistance with lipid analysis, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. this project was supported by a national science and engineering council discovery grant to mgf. 231 houston et al. references biro, p.a., morton, a.e., post, j.r. & parkinson, e.a. 2004. over-winter lipid depletion and mortality of age-0 rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 1513–1519. bøhn, t., sandlund, o.t., amundsen, p.a. & primicerio, r. 2004. rapidly changing life history during invasion. oikos 106: 138–150. brown, j.e. & stepien, c.a. 2009. invasion genetics of the eurasian round goby in north america: tracing sources and spread patterns. molecular ecology 18: 64–79. brownscombe, j.w. & fox, m.g. 2012. range expansion dynamics of the invasive round goby (neogobius melanosto- mus) in a river system. aquatic ecology 46: 175–189. brownscombe, j.w. & fox, m.g. 2013. living at the edge of the front: reduced predation risk to round goby in a great lakes tributary. hydrobiologia 707: 199–208. brownscombe, j.w., masson, l., beresford, d.v. & fox, m.g. 2012. modeling round goby neogobius melanostomus range expansion in a canadian river system. aquatic inva- sions 7: 537–545. bunnell, d.b., thomas, s.e. & stein, r.a. 2007. prey resources before spawning influence gonadal investment of female, but not male, white crappie. journal of fish biology 70: 1838–1854. burton, o., phillips, b. & travis, j. 2010. trade-offs and the evolution of life-histories during range expansion. ecology letters 13: 1210–1220. carlsson, n.o.l., sarnelle, o. & strayer, d.l. 2009. native predators and exotic prey – an acquired taste? frontiers in ecology and the environment 7: 525–532. carman, s.m., janssen, j., jude, d.j. & berg, m.b. 2006. diel interactions between prey behaviour and feeding in an inva- sive fish, the round goby, in a north american river. fresh- water biology 51: 742–755. charlebois, p.m., marsden, j.e., goettel, r.g., wolfe, r.k., jude, d.j. & rudnika, s. 1997. the round goby, neogobius melanostomus (pallas), a review of european and north american literature. zion, il: illinois-indiana sea grant pro- gram and illinois natural history survey. charlebois, p.m., corkum, l.d., jude, d.j. & knight, c. 2001. the round goby (neogobius melanostomus) invasion: current research and future needs. journal of great lakes research 27: 263–266. corkum, l.d., sapota, m.r. & skora, k.e. 2004. the round goby, neogobius melanostomus, a fish invader on both sides of the atlantic ocean. biological invasions 6: 173–181. feiner, z.s., aday, d.d. & rice, j.a. 2012. phenotypic shifts in white perch life history strategy across stages of invasion. biological invasions 14: 2315–2329. finstad, a.g., ugedal, o., forseth, t. & næsje, t.f. 2004. energy-related juvenile winter mortality in a northern popu- lation of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 2358–2368. finstad, a.g., berg, o.k., forseth, t., ugedal, o. & næsje, t.f. 2010. adaptive winter survival strategies: defended energy levels in juvenile atlantic salmon along a latitudinal gradient. proceedings of the royal society b: biological sciences 277: 1113–1120. 232 fiorin, r., malavasi, s., franco, a. & franzoi, p. 2007. com- parative energy allocation in two sympatric, closely related gobies: the black goby gobius niger and the grass goby zos- terisessor ophiocephalus. journal of fish biology 70: 483–496. fletcher, d.a. & wootton, r.j. 1995. a hierarchical response to difference in ration size in the reproductive performance of female three-spined sticklebacks. journal of fish biology 46: 657–668. fox, m.g. & crivelli, a. 1998. body size and reproductive allocation in a multiple spawning centrarchid. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 737–748. garvey, j.e. & marschall, e.a. 2003. understanding latitudi- nal trends in fish body size through models of optimal sea- sonal energy allocation. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 60: 938–948. grul’a, d., balazova, m., copp, g.h. & kovac, v. 2012. age and growth of invasive round goby neogobius melanosto- mus from middle danube. central european journal of biol- ogy 7: 448–459. gutowsky, l.f.g. & fox, m.g. 2012. intra-population vari- ability of life-history traits and growth during range expan- sion of the invasive round goby, neogobius melanostomus. fisheries management and ecology 19: 78–88. hay, d.e., brett, j.r., bilinkski, e., smith, d.t., donaldson, e.m., hunter, g.a. & solmie, a.v. 1988. experimental impoundments of prespawning pacific herring (clupea harengus pallasi): effects of feeding and density on matura- tion, growth, and proximate analysis. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences. 45: 388–398. hensler, s.r. & jude, d.j. 2007. diel vertical migration of round goby larvae in the great lakes. journal of great lakes research 33: 295–302. hermoso, v., clavero, m., blanco-garrido, f. & prenda, j. 2011. invasive species and habitat degradation in iberian streams: an analysis of their role in freshwater fish diversity loss. ecological applications 21: 175–188. hurst, t.p., schultz, e.t. & conover, d.o. 2000. seasonal energy dynamics of young-of-the-year hudson river striped bass. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 145–157. jobling, m., johansen, s., foshaug, h., burkow, i. & jørgen- sen, e. 1998. lipid dynamics in anadromous arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus (l.): seasonal variations in lipid storage depots and lipid class composition. fish physiology and biochemistry 18: 225–240. kirjasniemi, m. & valtonen, t. 1997. size-dependent over- winter mortality of young-of-the-year roach, rutilus rutilus. environmental biology of fishes 50: 451–456. kolar, c. & lodge, d. 2002. ecological predictions and risk assessment for alien fishes in north america. science 298: 1233–1236. kornis, m.s., mercado-silva, n. & vander zanden, m.j. 2012. twenty years of invasion: a review of round goby neogobius melanostomus biology, spread and ecological implications. journal of fish biology 80: 235–285. kulikova, n.i. 1985. the effect of chorionic gonadotropin on growth and maturation of the oocytes of the round goby, neogobius melanostomus. ichthyology 25: 86–98. (english translation of voprosy ikhtiologii 25: 300-312). journal of lappalainen, j., erm, v., kjellman, j. & lehtonen, h. 2000. size-dependent winter mortality of age-0 pikeperch (stizos- tedion lucioperca) in pernu bay, the baltic sea. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 57: 451–458. lee, v. & johnson, t. 2005. development of a bioenergetics model for the round goby (neogobius melanostomus). jour- nal of great lakes research 31: 125–134. light, t. & marchetti, m.p. 2007. distinguishing between invasions and habitat changes as drivers of diversity loss among california’s freshwater fishes. conservation biology 21: 434–446. lynch, m.p. & mensinger, a.f. 2013. temporal patterns in growth and survival of the round goby neogobius melano- stomus. journal of fish biology 82: 111–124. marchetti, m., moyle, p. & levine, r. 2004. invasive species profiling? exploring the characteristics of non-native fishes across invasion stages in california. freshwater biology 49: 646–661. nikol’skii, g. 1954. special ichthyology. moscow: sovetsh- kaya nauka. pangle, k., sutton, t., kinnunen, r. & hoff, m. 2004. over- winter survival of juvenile lake herring in relation to body size, physiological condition, energy stores, and food ration. transactions of the american fisheries society 133: 1235– 1246. pennuto, c.m., krakowiak, p.j. & janik, c.e. 2010. seasonal abundance, diet, and energy consumption of round gobies (neogobius melanostomus) in lake erie tributary streams. ecology of freshwater fish 19: 206–215. post, j.r. & evans, d.o. 1989. size-dependent overwinter mortality of young-of-the-year yellow perch (perca flaves- cens): laboratory, in situ enclosure, and field experiments. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 46: 1958–1968. overwintering and reproduction in round goby r development core team. 2011. r: a language and envi- ronment for statistical computing. vienna, austria: r foun- dation for statistical computing. available at: http://www. r-p roject.org/. raby, g.d., gutowsky, l.f.g. & fox, m.g. 2010. diet com- position and consumption rate in round goby (neogobius melanostomus) in its expansion phase in the trent river, ontario. environmental biology of fishes 89: 143–150. roff, d.a. 1982. reproductive strategies in flatfish: a first synthesis. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sci- ences 39: 1686–1698. schultz, e.t., clifton, l.m. & warner, r.r. 1991. energetic constraints and size-based tactics - the adaptive significance of breeding-schedule variation in a marine fish (embiotoci- dae, micrometrus-minimus). the american naturalist 138: 1408–1430. schultz, e.t., conover, d.o. & ehtisham, a. 1998. the dead of winter: size-dependent variation and genetic differences in seasonal mortality among atlantic silverside (atherinidae: menidia menidia) from different latitudes. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 1149–1157. shuter, b.j., maclean, j.a., fry, f.e.j. & regier, h.a. 1980. stochastic simulation of temperature effects on first-year survival of smallmouth bass. transactions of the american fisheries society 109: 1–34. shuter, b.j., finstad, a.g., helland, i.p., zweim€uller, i. & h€olker, f. 2012. the role of winter phenology in shaping the ecology of freshwater fish and their sensitivities to cli- mate change. aquatic sciences 74: 637–657. snyder, d. 1983. fish eggs and larvae. in: nielsen, l. & john- son, d., eds. fisheries techniques. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 165–197. zar, j. 2010. biostatistical analysis. upper saddle river, nj: prentice-hall, inc. 233  