ecology of freshwater fish 2014: 23: 244–258 ó 2013 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish swimming performance and ecomorphology of the iberian barbel luciobarbus bocagei (steindachner, 1864) on permanent and temporary rivers carlos m. alexandre1,2,3, bernardo r. quintella1,4, ana f. ferreira1, filipe a. rom~ao1, pedro r. almeida1,3 1centro de oceanografia, faculdade de ci^encias, universidade de lisboa, campo grande, 1749-016, lisboa, portugal 2centro de estudos florestais, instituto de agronomia, universidade tecnica de lisboa, lisboa, portugal 3departamento de biologia, escola de ci^encias e tecnologia, universidade de evora, largo dos colegiais 2, 7004-516, evora, portugal 4departamento de biologia animal, faculdade de ci^encias, universidade de lisboa, campo grande, 1749-016, lisboa, portugal accepted for publication may 11, 2013 abstract – spatial variability in streamflow characteristics is responsible for a large range of habitat variations to which fish are adapted through life-cycle strategies and morphological adaptations. in this study, we compared the swimming performance and related morphology of two iberian barbel populations from permanent and temporary rivers. the permanent river was characterised by its atlantic influence with higher water availability and a more unstable and turbulent environment, contrasting with the lower discharge setting observed in the southern mediterranean ecosystem during most of the hydrological year. barbels from the permanent river exhibited a higher critical swimming speed (ucrit) associated with a more fusiform body shape, narrower head and caudal peduncle, lower body condition and longer and higher pectoral and dorsal fins, when compared with the population from the temporary watercourse. these results reflect a morphological response in a way to reduce hydrodynamic resistance and energy expenditure during locomotion that we hypothesise here to be related with the different hydrological regimes of the studied systems. key words: streamflow; mediterranean rivers; critical swimming speed; morphology; cyprinidae introduction natural streamflow variability, encompassing both interannual and intra-annual variation in the timing, duration and frequency of various flows, is an impor- tant feature for maintaining the integrity and biodi- versity of riverine ecosystems (poff & allan 1995; poff et al. 1997). the hydrological regime of a river catchment is strongly influenced by rainfall patterns, particularly in the southern european regions influ- enced by a mediterranean-type climate, leading to strong spatial, seasonal and annual variability in river discharge (gasith & resh 1999). in most of these streams, the high flows start in late fall and winter fol- lowed by a subsequent drying and declining of river flow that leads to the complete lack of surface water in the river or the maintenance of only some isolated pools in the river bed during the summer period (poff & ward 1989). these watercourses are usually desig- nated as intermittent or temporary streams. however, in the wetter areas of southern regions, where the cli- mate influence shifts from mediterranean to atlantic, the streams usually maintain a higher and permanent discharge or at least hold surface water throughout the year (gasith & resh 1999). this spatial difference in the magnitude, variability and duration of river flow produces a large range of habitat variations, to which native organisms are adapted and can respond to through life-history strategies and morphological adaptations (gatz 1979; langerhans 2008). correspondence: c. m. alexandre, centro de oceanografia, faculdade de ci^encias, universidade de lisboa, campo grande, 1749-016 lisboa, portugal. e-mail: cmalexandre@fc.ul.pt 244 doi: 10.1111/eff.12073 swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes fishes have numerous developed ecological, behavioural and morphological (e.g., fin and body shape, higher proportion of red or white muscle) fea- tures, enabling some fish to be, for example, more fit at sustaining higher current velocities for exploiting food resources, reducing competition and predation, traversing large sections of streams during migration and persist in variable flow environments (gatz 1979; wood & bain 1995; langerhans 2009). swim- ming performance is considered a main character determining survival in many species of fish and other aquatic animals. it is assumed that the maximal swimming performance may strongly influence the ability of a fish to obtain food, find a mate or avoid unfavourable habitat conditions (plaut 2001). the most common way to measure swimming perfor- mance of fishes is the critical swimming speed. this parameter is a special category of prolonged swim- ming first defined and employed by brett (1964), to designate the maximum velocity, a fish could main- tain for a precise time period (beamish 1978). it is also presumed to be a relatively close measure of maximum aerobic capacity of the fish and gives a good estimate for swimming ability in general as it includes aerobic and anaerobic swimming (hammer 1995). this test is a measure of fitness associated with flowing environments and has been frequently used to evaluate the effects of various factors on fish swimming ability, to infer habitat relationships and to explain patterns in fish morphology (hawkins & quinn 1996; plaut 2001; ward et al. 2003). swimming performance and costs are highly dependent on the morphological characteristics of a species (lighthill 1969). morphology sets general limits on the capacity of an organism to use habitats and foods (wainwright et al. 2002; svanback & eklov 2004; langerhans 2008). design features can be related to energy use or swimming activity by functional analyses, and it has been shown that body shape is an important factor for energy-reducing strat- egies in high flow scenarios (webb 1993; pettersson & hedenstrom 2000; franssen 2011). divergent nat- ural selection typically arises from a combination of (i) a functional trade-off where organisms cannot simultaneously optimise multiple types of perfor- mances , and (ii) a shift in the balance of selection on these performance variables across environments, where selection in one environment favours one type of performance but selection in another environment favours another type of performance (langerhans 2008, 2009). both functional trade-offs and environ- ment heterogeneity are common place and together are largely responsible for much of the phenotypic diversity that exists today (langerhans 2009). several studies have explored the relationships among habitat selection and adaptation, morphology and swimming speed in freshwater fishes, which has been considered a key aspect of modern evolutionary ecology (e.g., aleev 1969; page & swofford 1984; scarnecchia 1988; langerhans 2008; haas et al. 2010; franssen 2011). the general trends established usually indicate that fishes with laterally compressed, deeper bodies and rounded caudal and paired fins tend to select sluggish waters, because their body and fins are bet- ter suited for manoeuvering. fishes from high flow areas commonly present fusiform body shapes with long pectoral and pelvic fins and forked caudal fins. these general assumptions are well recognised but the relationship between ecology, morphology and swimming capacity is less evident when comparisons are made among congeners, between different popu- lations of the same species or considering more regional-scale and long-term environmental condi- tions such as the natural hydrological regime or river impoundments (ojanguren & bra~na 2003; langer- hans 2009; leavy & bonner 2009; franssen 2011; schaefer et al. 2011; franssen et al. 2013). the iberian barbel is a potamodromous cyprinid endemic to the iberian peninsula and occurs in a wide range of lotic and lentic habitats from almost all the river basins of northern and central portugal (lobon- cervia & fernandez-delgado 1984; magalh~aes 1992). it is considered a nonthreatened species in the iberian peninsula (doadrio 2001; cabral et al. 2005). during spring, this species migrates upstream to spawn in gravel or sandy riverbed areas with fast water flow, thus being considered a reophilic species (rodrõguez- ruiz & granado-lorencio 1992). this species has received some attention in recent years through studies on its aerobic swimming capacity (mateus et al. 2008) and behaviour (e.g., silva et al. 2011, 2012). how- ever, the majority of these studies are focused on fish from a single specific area. considering the species’ wider distribution across several river basins with dis- tinct natural hydrological and habitat features, there is a need to characterise the basal differences in swim- ming performance and morphology to understand and improve the generalisation and regional applicability of such studies. intraspecific morphological differ- ences between separate populations were already observed in previous morphology studies with other freshwater species (i.e., taylor & mcphail 1985; shepherd 1991). many of these authors have sug- gested that, within a species, morphological features are responsive to local habitat conditions. swain et al. (1991) proposed that coho salmon (oncorhyncus kisutch walbaum, 1792) is capable of changing its morphology to cope with their local environment. similarly, that morphometric variation in pink salmon (oncorhyncus gorbuscha walbaum, 1792) reflected adaptation to local water velocity in spawning streams. more beacham (1985) concluded 245 alexandre et al. recently, haas et al. (2010) described morphological variations in the cyprinid blacktail shiner (cyprinella venusta girard, 1856) inhabiting stream and reservoir habitats. the main objective of this study was to compare the swimming performance and morphology of two iberian barbel populations from river basins with permanent and temporary hydrological regimes. we hypothesise that each one of these populations have distinct ecomorphologies and, consequently, different swimming abilities that are associated with the two completely different flow regimes from where these populations are from. what we expect is that fish from the permanent basin will exhibit a higher swim- ming performance, resulting from a more ‘swim-fit’ morphology, than the population from the temporary river. the information gathered with this study can provide important guidelines for the conservation and management of freshwater ecosystems by allowing the establishment of regional water velocity criteria for fishways and culverts and the assessment of the potential impacts of instream flow alterations (peake 2008; leavy & bonner 2009). material and methods fish capture between march and april of 2012, 60 specimens of l. bocagei were captured with electric fishing gear (hans grassl el 62 generator, dc, 300 v; sch€onau am k€onigssee, germany). thirty of these fish were captured in river vez (wgs84 – n 41°48′54′′; w 8°25′34′′), one of the main tributaries of river lima basin and a typical river from the northern region of portugal with permanent hydrological regime, and the remaining specimens were caught in river corona (wgs84 – n 38°01′35′′; w 8°25′52′′), a typical tem- porary river located in river sado basin in the south of the country (fig. 1). several authors refer to fish size as one of the most important factors affecting swimming performance (beamish 1978; hammer 1995; plaut 2001), and this fact was already confirmed for the studied species (mateus et al. 2008). therefore, during the capture, we preselected animals of similar size (between 200 and 250 mm) to reduce a priori the potential bias of this variable in our analysis. hydrological characterisation this study addresses the relationship between swim- ming performance, morphology and the hydrological context of two iberian barbel populations from distinct regions of the iberian peninsula. therefore, the river basins from which we collected our fish samples reflect two opposite hydrological regimes that can 246 flowing river and a predictable flow variation occur in this mediterranean region. river vez is a nat- ural located in river lima basin (fig. 1), with 38 km in length and a drainage area of 264 km2. this area shows an atlantic influence and is (1196  characterised by a high annual 347 mm) and low air temperature (12.6  1.23 °c) (inag 2008), which are responsible for the mainte- nance of a permanent flow in the river throughout the year. river corona is located in the sado basin, has a length of 35 km and a drainage area of 200 km2. this mediterranean watercourse exhibits a strong tempo- rary regime, typically characterised by a strong inter- annual and accentuated pattern of river bed drying that lasts from late spring until mid-autumn (fig. 1), mostly related with the low annual rainfall (587  84 mm) and high air temperature (16.7  0.92 °c) common to this southern region of the iberian peninsula (inag 2008). river vez has a steeper gradient with a mean value of 0.03 mkm  1, and river corona is character- ised by a gentle gradient with a much lower mean value of 0.005 mkm  1. rainfall, temperature and gra- dient patterns strongly influence the magnitude, vari- ability and duration of flow, ultimately affecting the overall water availability in these ecosystems. aver- age annual flow volume is much higher in river vez (371.59 hm3) than in river corona (39.78 hm3) as well as the average difference between the maximum and the minimum flow volumes along the year (river vez: 99.36 hm3; river corona: 22.85 hm3). both riv- ers present the same pattern of flow seasonality with higher and lower flow values being registered in december and august, respectively (fig. 1), but accentuated differences are observed in the magnitude and duration of these extreme events. high flow val- ues (q > q5%, flow values that surpass the flow asso- ciated with the 5% percentile on the flow duration curve) are higher and more common in river vez (average maximum daily flow of 224.30 m3s  1) than in river corona (59.68 m3s  1) but, on the other hand, the temporary river exhibits a drier and longer low flow period (q < q95%; flow values that are lower than the flow associated with the 95% percentile on the flow duration curve), with a null average minimum flow, in comparison with the value of 0.35 m3s  1, registered in the permanent stream during this period. flow components directly responsible for changes on the river geomorphology, substrate dynamics and hydraulic habitat, such as the effective (with geomor- phological significance; river vez: 210.31 m3s  1; river corona: 60.5 m3s  1) and connectivity (associ- ated with river-floodplain connectivity; river vez: 271.10 m3s  1) discharges and the flushing flood magnitude (associ- ated with river sediment dynamics, q5%;river vez: 45.81 m3s  1) are much  1; river corona: 7.03 m3s 80.92 m3s rainfall  1; river corona: swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes fig. 1. provenance regions of the two studied populations of luciobarbus bocagei and respective hydrological characterisation (black and grey lines represent the permanent and temporary basins, respectively), based on a 30-year-time series, of: mean daily discharge (m3s  1), mean monthly volume (hm3) and flow duration curve (m3s  1). lower in the temporary system. in short, the hydrologi- cal analysis of these two rivers indicates the occur- rence and temporal persistence of a more unstable and turbulent environment in the northern permanent basin, contrasting with the more stable, slow flow, riv- erine environment present in the southern ecosystem during virtually half of the hydrological year. stream- flow characterisation presented in this section was based on a 30 year flow series for each river obtained from the portuguese environment agency (apa, i.p) database (www.snirh.pt). swim tunnel tests after capture, experimental fish were carried directly to the laboratory and placed in an indoor (2000 l) circular holding tank with controlled photoperiod (12 h light/12 h dark) and a proper life support system to maintain water quality. all animals were allowed to recover for at least 2 days prior to the swimming performance tests and were not fed during the experimental stage (<1 week). each fish was tested only once. this study was conducted in accor- dance with all the portuguese legislation regarding animal capture, manipulation and experimentation for scientific purposes. to assess the swimming capacity of the two popu- lations of l. bocagei, we used the critical swimming speed (ucrit) test, following the procedure described by brett (1964). the swim tunnel was designed as a recirculating water tunnel incorporating a 72 cm long and 25-cm-diameter clear acrylic tube with metal grids at both ends that is used as the swim/viewing chamber. a 2.3 hp submersible propeller motor (model sr4620.410 hg; flyght, ges€allv€agen, swe- den) pumped water through the system, allowing a 247 alexandre et al. steady current velocity range between 0 and 1.5 ms  1, in the swim chamber, that is fully con- trolled by the operator. for more details on the swim apparatus see mateus et al. (2008). temperature was kept constant (16 °c) during the entire study period, both in the holding tank and in the swimming tunnel. the temperature level experienced by the fish during the entire procedure was set to be within the range to which this species is subjected in the wild during the spawning migration season (i.e., march–june) (rodríguez-ruiz & granado-lorencio 1992). fish were transferred from the holding tank to the swim chamber with a watertight sock net made of soft black cloth to minimise handling-related stress by holding water and creating, at the same time, a dark environment. all trials were carried out at the same light intensity to eliminate possible effects on swimming behaviour. to reduce the level of stress of the tested individuals, the front section of the swim chamber was covered with an opaque pvc tube with the objective to be used as cover. before the tests, the fish underwent a 1-h acclimation period at a low water velocity of 0.20 ms  1 to recover from han- in the swim dling and to allow the fish to orient the chamber. following the conditioning period, water velocity was increased by 0.15 ms  1 every 30 min until exhaustion was reached. during the test, fish were discouraged from resting on the rear grid using an electric field (7–12 v, 4 a) that was turned on for 2 s when the fish appeared to be touching the grid. this was enough to cause com- plete avoidance of the grid and to encourage the fish to swim forward. exhaustion was considered to have been reached at the point at which a fish was unable to move away from the grid despite 2 s consecutive electric stimulations in a maximum 10-s period (brett this stage, the test 1964; mateus et al. 2008). at (ms  1) was calculated ended, and absolute ucrit (1964): using the formula described by brett  1)], where ui ucrit = ui + [uii 9 (ti 9 tii is the highest velocity maintained for the entire 30 min interval the velocity increment (ms  1), ti is the time elapsed at exhaustion velocity (s) and tii is the prescribed interval time (s). the velocity at which the fish were swimming in the swim chamber was corrected for the solid blocking effect, using the expression developed by bell &  1)], terhune where uc is the corrected velocity, us is the velocity in the absence of the fish, ai is the maximum cross- sectional area of the fish and aii is the cross-sectional area of the swim chamber. the cross-sectional area of the fish was assumed to approximate an ellipse  1), where and therefore, equal to p 9 (h2 h and w represent the maximum body height and width of the fish, respectively. (1970): uc = us 9 [1 + (ai 9 aii  1) 9 (w2 is (ms  1), uii 248 at the end of the trials, fish were euthanised by immersion in a solution with a lethal concentration of 2-phenoxyetanol and measured for total weight (tw, to the nearest 0.1 g), total length (tl, to the nearest 1 mm) and for cross-sectional area. fish were sexed and gonads weighed (gw, wet weight, to the nearest 1 g) to examine the relationship between gonad maturation and performance (adams & parsons 1998). for potamodromous cyprinids, it is expected that the higher swimming capacities coincide with the period when they are most needed, that is, the spawning period. to evaluate this effect, we calculated the gonado-somatic index (gsi) for each one of the tested fish, using the formula  1)100, and statistically compared gsi = (gw tw this index between the two populations, separately for males and females, using a mann–whitney pro- cedure. the same analysis was used to compare the ucrit between the two l. bocagei populations. for these statistical analyses, as for the ones described next, all assumptions for the use of appropriate para- metric methodologies were previously tested and, in case of nonfulfilment, the equivalent nonparametric analysis was employed. morphometric analysis after the critical swimming tests and general laborato- rial measurements and analyses previously described, fish were analysed for morphometric variation between barbels from the northern permanent basin and from the southern temporary system. this analysis was performed only for the fish that performed well (i.e., swimming steadily with good reophilic behav- iour) in the swim chamber and successfully completed the test. digital photographs were taken with a sony handycam hdr-xr200ve (tokyo, japan) (image resolution of 4.0 mp) of the left side of each specimen, and 11 landmarks were defined and recorded as two- dimensional (x and y) coordinates (fig. 2), using the software tpsdig (rohlf 1996). landmark coordinates were adjusted with a generalised procrustes analysis (gpa; rohlf & slice 1990). this procedure centres each specimen onto a common centroid, scales all specimens to a common unit size by dividing each total configuration by centroid size and lastly rotates each specimen to a common orientation that minimis- es the differences between corresponding landmarks. we estimated a ‘consensus’ form composed of the mean coordinates for each landmark averaged across all specimens. for each barbel, we estimated 18 partial warps plus the respective centroid size using the soft- ware tpsrelw (rohlf 1997). partial warps are the minimal shape parameters needed to deform the ‘con- sensus’ configuration to each one of the analysed specimens and contain shape information (outputted swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes fig. 2. location of the 11 landmarks used in the geometric morphometric analysis to characterise the body shape variation between the two luciobarbus bocagei populations. on a weight matrix) that can be analysed through con- ventional multivariate statistics (adams et al. 2004). next, we conducted a relative warp analysis which is a principal components analysis of partial warp scores computed from the distance data (rohlf 1993). the relative warps were computed in the full shape space, including both the uniform (changes in shape by the same ratio in orthogonal directions) and the nonuni- form (other shape variations reflected in local defor- mations) components. to test the hypothesis of significant variations in body shape between the two barbel populations, we conducted a multivariate analysis of covariance (man- cova, wilks’s k method) in which population mem- bership (permanent versus temporary rivers), sex (male and female) and the interaction between popu- lation and sex served as fixed effects. partial warps were used as dependent variables, and centroid size was used as a covariate to test and, if found to be sig- nificant, control for size allometry effects in our data. effects strength was approximated by the use of par- tial eta squared (g2). to complement this analysis and highlight shape differences between the two bar- bel populations, we also applied a multivariate discri- minant function analysis (dfa, wilks’s k method) on partial warps matrix. the analysis included a cross-validation procedure to identify the percentage of correct classifications by comparing the morphol- ogy-related classification of each specimen made by the dfa with our a priori classification of each bar- bel into one of the two populations. individual scores associated with the first canonical root were extracted from the discriminant analysis and regressed against the partial warp scores, using the software tpsregr (rohlf 1998), to help visualise and interpret shape differences among the two studied populations this procedure creates deformation grid plots that reflect how one form can be stretched, pulled and shrunk to deform it into another related form and the result reflects the degree and type of shape change between the ‘consensus’ form and the form of each population analysed (adams et al. 2004). the fit of the data to the regression model was tested with the generalised goodall’s f-test. supplemental measurements we complemented our morphometric analysis with the measurement of several additional morphological attributes of the studied barbels. we selected nine morphological characteristics considered important for defining swimming ability of fish (gatz 1979; leavy & bonner 2009), namely: flatness index (flat index, ratio between maximum body depth and maxi- mum body width); relative body depth (r bdepth, ratio between maximum body depth and standard length); relative peduncle length (r plength, ratio between caudal peduncle length and standard length); relative caudal span (r cspan, ratio between caudal span and maximum body depth); relative pectoral fin length (r peclength, ratio between pectoral fin length and standard length); caudal fin area (carea, cm2); relative dorsal fin height (r dheigth, ratio between dorsal fin height and maximum body depth); relative dorsal fin length (r dlength, ratio between dorsal fin length and standard length); body condition index [k = (tw tl  3)100]. we analysed discrimination among the two barbel populations in these morphological attributes with a dfa (wilks’s k method), using a forward stepwise process to select the morphological variables that sig- nificantly contributed to the discrimination between the two groups. similarly to the shape analysis, we also performed a cross-validation procedure to iden- tify the percentage of correct classifications, based on these supplemental variables, of each specimen made by the dfa. to complement these tests and aid the visualisation of the differences between the two pop- ulations related with the supplemental morphological variables, we conducted a principal component analy- 249 alexandre et al. sis (pca) to characterise the morphological segrega- tion among the studied fish and confirm the variables that strongly influenced this separation. scores from pca axis i and ii were correlated (spearman’s rank correlation, q) with individual critical swimming speed to assess the relationship between these supple- mental morphological variables and fish swimming performance. results critical swimming speed eighty-three percent (n = 25) of the barbels captured in the permanent river, and ninety percent (n = 27) of the barbels captured in the temporary watercourse, successfully completed the ucrit test. the eight bar- bels that showed poor reophilic behaviour (i.e., mov- ing backwards and forwards in the swim chamber or not moving at all) during the acclimation period, and initial velocity increments of the test were removed from further analysis. the average ucrit was statisti- cally different between the two populations analysed (mann–whitney; w = 671.5; p-value < 0.001) (fig. 3). barbels from the permanent river exhibited fig. 3. box-plots (■ – median value; – the 25 and 75% per- – minimum and maximum nonoutlier values) with the centiles;  1) obtained for distribution of the critical swimming speeds (ms the luciobarbus bocagei associated with permanent and tempo- rary systems. fig. 4. scatterplot depicting ordination of the 52 analysed lucio- barbus bocagei on relative warps 1 and 2. in the cases legend: □ – permanent river males; ○ – permanent river females; ■ – tem- porary river males;● – temporary river females.  1 (mean  sd), an average ucrit of 0.75  0.05 ms than the ucrit of 0.59  significantly higher 0.06 ms  1 observed for the temporary river individu- als (table 1). barbels captured in the permanent water- course had an average tl of 220.25  1.71 mm, whereas fish from the temporary river had an average tl of 219.82  1.98 mm. also, both fish samples exhibited more or less the same level of relative gona- dal weight, reflected on similar gsi values for females (mann–whitney; w = 408.51; p = 0.19) and males (mann–whitney; w = 308.51; p = 0.22) from the two populations, indicating that the results from our swimming performance comparison are not biased by population-related differences in the reproductive cycle. body shape analysis we used tpsrelw to summarise the overall deforma- tions from the consensus configuration in our sample, corresponding to different pairs of relative warps. fig- ure 4 depicts an ordination of the morphometric varia- tion among the 52 fish along the first two relative warps, which together account for 68.1% of the total shape variation. loadings on the first relative warp were highest for the vertical (y) component of shape variation corresponding to three nonuniform geomet- ric scales (4y, 6y and 8y) and the y component of uni- form variation (warp uy). overall, loadings on the table 1. data on the experimental fish that successfully completed the critical swimming test: total length (tl), total body weight (tw), gonado-somatic index (gsi) and absolute critical swimming speed (ucrit) values (mean; [range]) for both luciobarbus bocagei populations sex ratio 8♂/17♀ 17♂/10♀ tl (mm) tw (g) gsi 220.25 (200–250) 219.82 (200–248) 83.31 (43.13–146.30) 84.58 (57.20–150.41) 6.61 (1.30–7.01) 5.11 (0.41–6.30) ucrit (ms  1) 0.75 (0.68–0.87) 0.59 (0.38–0.69) river vez river corona 250 swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes second relative warp were lower than for the first one and were mainly associated with two warps corre- sponding to the horizontal component of nonuniform variation (4x, 5x). there is a clear morphological seg- regation, mainly along the first relative warp, between the barbels from the permanent and temporary rivers (fig. 4). there are no obvious shape differences between males and females within each population, and this result is supported by the absence of sex effects on the mancova of partial warps (table 2). the mancova performed on the weight matrix of partial warps revealed that centroid size had no sig- nificant effect on shape variation within our sample (table 2), indicating that allometry effects were absent from our shape data. mancova showed a sig- nificant population effect on shape variation within the tested barbels (wilks’s k = 0.171; f18,30 = 8.089; p < 0.001) (table 2). sex and its interaction with population did not showed significant effects on shape variation, evidencing population membership as the main and highest (partial g2 = 0.829) effect explain- ing shape variation within our sample (table 2). this table 2. summary of mancova of the effects of population (p = permanent river population; t = temporary (m = male; f = female), their interaction and fish size (centroid size) on body shape variation of the tested barbels. variation was measured in 18-partial warps. for each test, d.f. = 18 (effect) and 30 (error). river population), sex scores (wilks’s root revealed that seven of result was supported by the dfa performed on the same warp matrix, which revealed highly significant differences between barbels from the permanent and temporary basins (wilks’s k = 0.154; f18,33 = 10.03; p < 0.001). cross-validation matrices generated from the dfa indicated that 96% (n = 24) of the barbels from the permanent river and 100% from the tempo- rary river were correctly classified a priori. the regression of partial warp scores (including uniform and nonuniform components) against the dfa canon- first ical k18,3 = 0.000; p < 0.001) the 18 partial warps were significant at the 5% level. the general- ised goodall’s test revealed a significant fit to the model (f18,900 = 26.61; p < 0.001) and the model explained almost 25% of the sum of the squared pro- crustes residual distances for the entire specimens sample. deformation grids resulting from the regres- sion procedure (fig. 5), which are associated with the degree and type of shape change required to deform the consensus form into the average form of each population, reveal that the barbels from the per- manent river present a more fusiform body shape with narrower head, mid-body and caudal peduncle and a pointed snout. the barbel population from the temporary watercourse exhibits a deeper body with larger head, body and caudal peduncle. source of variation wilks’s k f p-value partial g2 supplemental measurements size (centroid size) population (p or t) sex (m or f) population 9 sex 0.560 0.171 0.501 0.561 1.308 8.089 1.660 1.306 0.251 <0.001 0.107 0.252 0.140 0.829 0.229 0.328 the dfa based on the supplemental morphological measurements significantly discriminated barbels from the permanent and temporary rivers (wilks’s k = 0.117; f7,44 = 47.38; p < 0.001). barbels from (a) (b) fig. 5. deformation grids depicting shape differences between (a) luciobarbus bocagei population from the northern permanent basin and (b) l. bocagei from the southern temporary system. these grids reflect the degree and type of shape change required to deform the consen- sus form into the average form of each population. 251 alexandre et al. fig. 6. plots depicting (a) direction and extent of the relationship between the morphological variables and the two-first pca axes (b) ordi- nation of the 52 analysed luciobarbus bocagei based on the nine supplemental morphometric variables analysed. in the cases legend: □ – permanent river males; ○ – permanent river females; ■ – temporary river males; ● – temporary river females. the permanent river have a more streamlined body (flat index; p < 0.001), a higher relative pectoral fin length (r peclength; p < 0.05) and a lower body condition (k; p < 0.05). dorsal fin showed particular differences between the two barbel populations, because fish from the permanent river have a higher (r dheight; p < 0.05) but narrower (r dlength); p < 0.05) fin when compared with the specimens from the temporary river. cross-validation matrices indicated that 100% of the barbels from both rivers were correctly classified a priori considering the sup- plemental morphological variables measured. the first two axis of the pca explained 63.5% of the morphological variation related with the supple- mental attributes measured among the two barbel groups. the first pc axis (pc1) primarily revealed dif- ferences (fig. 6a) in r bdepth (pc loading = 0.727), r peclength ( 0.521), k (0.790) and r dheight ( 0.909). the second pc axis (pc2) was mainly asso- ciated with differences in flat index (0.613) and r dlength ( 0.622). barbels from the permanent river were mostly associated negatively with pc1 and posi- tively with pc2 (fig 6b), describing fish with higher pectoral fin length and dorsal fin height, lower body depth and dorsal fin length and more streamlined body. on the other hand, barbels from the temporary river were generally associated positively with pc1 and negatively with pc2, being characterised by a deeper and broader body, lengthier dorsal fin and smaller pectoral fin. specimens from the southern river also have a higher body condition. the correla- tion of individual pca scores with critical swimming speed values revealed that this variable was inversely related with pc1 (q =  0.432; p < 0.05) and directly with pc2 (q = 0.562; p < 0.05). collectively, fish 252 with more streamlined body shapes, higher dorsal fins and longer pectoral fins tend to achieve a higher criti- cal swimming speed value. discussion in this study, we compared the swimming perfor- mance and related ecomorphology of two l. bocagei populations from river basins with different hydrologi- cal regimes. the two rivers from where we collected the experimental fish have considerable differences regarding flow magnitude, duration and variability which, together with the distinct gradient patterns, result in strong habitat asymmetries that are intimately related with key ecological aspects of these ecosys- tems, namely geomorphological dynamics, resistance and resilience thresholds of the biota and species life cycles (poff et al. 1997; richter et al. 1998). both riv- ers are also characterised by strong differences in flow variables such as the effective and connectivity dis- charge and the flushing flood. the higher values for these flow components in the permanent river, in com- parison with the temporary watercourse, are responsi- ble for an ecosystem where fishes are subjected to stronger geomorphological and substrate changes (hickey & salas 1995), benefit from a more mean- dered channel, have frequent access to new habitats created by the higher transversal connectivity (e.g., brizga et al. 2001) and are often faced with a more turbulent habitat mosaic (poff et al. 1997). considering the environmental differences between the two basins and having in mind that the native fish fauna from the iberian peninsula is capable of coping with regional environmental specificities (collares- pereira et al. 2000), we tested the hypothesis that the swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes higher swimming speed, critical  1). ucrit distinct hydrological pattern to which each population is exposed can induce significant variations in their swimming capacity. the results obtained in this study clearly demonstrate our hypothesis, because barbels from the northern permanent system exhibited a sig- nificantly in comparison with the barbels from river corona (southern temporary system). the population from the permanent river had an average ucrit of 0.75 ms  1, considerably higher than the value regis- tered for the population from the temporary water- course (0.59 ms tests had already been conducted for l. bocagei (mateus et al. 2008) but using fish from a different population from the tagus basin in the centre region of portugal. in mateus et al. (2008) study, barbels from the same length class presented an average ucrit value (0.76 ms  1) similar to the one observed for the northern popula- tion but again higher than the value registered for the southern population analysed in our study, emphasis- ing the lower swimming performance presented by temporary river’s fish. one explanation for the criti- cal swimming speed differences observed between the northern and southern barbels could be the rela- tionship between the level of environmental pressure that each population experience in their native river and the probably high physiological and morphologi- cal plasticity of this species (hammer 1995; langer- hans 2008). by living in a more turbulent and swift environment, barbels from the permanent river have a higher conditioning level to be able to persist in these sites and not be displaced downstream during high flow events, which has already been described for other fish species (e.g., ward et al. 2003; scott & magoulick 2008). in contrast, barbels from the tem- porary river live in a more sluggish environment, where the only annual peak flow events are the typi- cal autumn flushing floods, thus attaining a lower level of physical condition to endure permanent high flows. hochachka (1961) demonstrated that the envi- ronment in which fish live has a considerable effect on their oxygen consumption and recovery time. in this study, coho salmons (o. kisutch) raised in tanks with a water velocity of 24 cms  1 exhibited higher cruising speed and less susceptibility to fati- gue than salmons reared in tanks with lower current velocity. fish behaviour and morphological adaptations also influence the species swimming performance and per- sistence in swift waters. behaviours that improve a fish capability for withstanding high current veloci- ties include the exploitation of velocity refuges, the adjustment of the body and fin position, and move- ment relative to the substrate (minckley & meffe 1987; ward et al. 2003). in this study, to comple- ment the critical swimming speed results, we also performed a morphological analysis that demon- strated the existence of significant morphological dif- ferences between barbel populations associated with these distinct hydrological environments. in short, fish from the permanent river, that achieved a higher critical swimming speed, presented a more stream- lined and fusiform body, with narrower head, mid- body and caudal peduncle, lower body condition and higher dorsal and longer pectoral fins, in comparison with barbels from the southern temporary river, which performed poorly in the swim tests. the rela- tionships found in this study between swimming per- formance, morphology and the distinct hydrological contexts to which the tested barbels were naturally subjected can have simple biomechanical interpreta- tions. cyprinids are characterised by a subcarangi- form swimming mode (lindsey 1978) and achieve propulsion by the lateral undulation of the posterior half of the body, using mainly the caudal peduncle. therefore, individuals with fusiform body and nar- rower caudal peduncle, like the barbels from the per- manent river, are more able to face turbulent waters because this type of body shape favours swimming through the reduction in drag forces and the increase in thrust propulsion, reducing the energy expenditure necessary to maintain position or swim forward (m€uller et al. 2000; langherans et al. 2003). a reduced peduncle depth was identified by lighthill (1969) as one of the main morphological adaptations to minimise turbulence effects. individuals with relatively longer tails and narrower caudal peduncles can perform wider tail beat amplitudes and thus swim more efficiently. barbels from the temporary river face a calmer environment and their deeper bodies and wider peduncles are better suitable for slow movement and manoeuvering than for swimming in high flow areas (aleev 1969; scarnecchia 1988). many traits that enhance performance at one mode necessarily compromise performance in the other and this trade-off between two different types of locomo- tor performance in distinct flow environments have been subject of some recent studies dealing with the relationship of fish swimming performance, habitat use and associated morphology (e.g., langerhans 2008; haas et al. 2010; schaefer et al. 2011). while fish virtually contend with competing demands for steady swimming (constant speed locomotion in a straight line) and unsteady swimming (more compli- cated locomotor patterns in which changes in velocity or direction occur, such as fast-starts, rapid turns, manoeuvering, braking and so on) performances (langerhans 2009), this balance is expected to shift towards favouring steady swimming in high-flow environments, where fish must often swim to main- tain position and perform routine tasks under arduous conditions, but on the other hand, will favour 253 alexandre et al. unsteady swimming in low velocity environments where fish are largely freed from the severe demands on endurance and can instead exploit resources requiring manoeuverability (langerhans 2008). inti- mately associated with the overall shape of the fish, the body condition factor (k’) was also a differentiat- ing morphological attribute between the two analysed populations, attaining higher values in the sample from the temporary river and being related with fish critical swimming speed. this variable usually reflects a trade-off between two-opposing selective forces. on one hand, high levels of energy reserves could increase the individuals’ reproductive invest- ment (moyle & cech 1996). on the other hand, the accumulation of energy reserves could be disadvanta- geous, particularly in high flow rivers like the permanent river analysed in this study, because it may lead to an overall body shape that is stouter and less fusiform (like the one found in the temporary river population), which can increase drag forces and, as a consequence, swimming costs (boily & magnan 2002). such conflict between the accumulations of energy reserves and locomotor efficiency is well doc- umented in other animal groups, such as small birds, where the accumulation of fat causes an increase in the energetic costs of flight (chai & millard 1997). the observed differences in body condition between the two populations can also be related with the type and availability of food items and their relationship with the habitat characteristics. barbels from both rivers present a typical omnivore diet, mainly com- posed of invertebrates, especially from the diptera and ephemeroptera groups, vegetation material and other organic detritus (alexandre, c.m., sales, s., ferreira, m.t. & almeida, p.r., unpublished data). however, invertebrates constitute an important item on the diet composition of the permanent river popu- lation, in comparison with the predominance of vege- tation and organic detritus in the gut content of the southern barbels, which is probably related with the lower abundance, biomass and diversity of these ani- mals in intermittent mediterranean watercourses (mas-marti et al. 2010). despite the fact that inverte- brates are probably more nutritious than other food items, the southern barbels have access to a high amount of food for a longer time period because veg- etation and organic detritus tend to accumulate in higher quantities in the ‘lentic’ environment that pre- dominates during most of the year in the temporary river, resulting in an increased river productivity (rayner et al. 2009), thus adding another explanation for the higher body condition observed in the south- ern population of this species. the different feeding patterns exhibited by the two studied populations can also be related with their respective swimming capa- bility and morphology. presumably, the deeper body 254 of the southern barbels favours feeding in more com- plex habitats, near the margin and in no flow areas like dead or backwaters with dense vegetation, where organic detritus tend to accumulate in high quantities and a high manoeuverability capacity is required (langerhans 2008), while the streamlined body of northern fish is more oriented to feed on invertebrates occupying a great variety of habitats, for which a fast and efficient swimming is essential (svanback & eklov 2004; ohlberger et al. 2006). the importance of fins on fish swimming move- ments is widely discussed on the literature (e.g., west- neat 1996; wainwright et al. 2002). dorsal and caudal fin of fish may interact to enhance trust production and, more specifically, dorsal fin is used by fish to generate off-axis forces during turning manoeuvers (lauder & drucker 2004). the paired pectoral fins of teleost fish function as flexible foils under complex motor control that permit high swimming and ma- noeuvering (drucker & jensen 1996). in this study, differences in the length and height of the pectoral and dorsal fins were observed between the two barbel pop- ulations. barbels from the permanent river exhibited longer pectoral and higher dorsal fins when compared with the smaller pectoral and lengthier but shorter dor- sal fins found in the population inhabiting the tempo- rary system. contrarily to what happens in some fish species, for example, from the labridae family, that use the pectoral fins for locomotion (wainwright et al. 2002), during steady swimming in salmonids or cypri- nids the pectoral fins may be completely inactive (drucker & lauder 2003). with the increase in flow and in more turbulent and well-defined vortical struc- tures, which happens more intensely and frequently in permanent and high flowing environments than in temporary low flow rivers, pectoral fin activity is induced to aid fish maintaining a benthic station hold- ing in turbulent areas (arnold & weihs 1978; webb 1989). in studies evaluating the performance of l. bocagei in an experimental fishway, fish showed exactly this behaviour, often using pectoral fins to maintain position and rest, especially before moving upstream through the passage orifices (e.g., silva et al. 2011, 2012; alexandre et al. 2013). longer pectoral fins can be useful to improve this behaviour, resulting in longer endurance time and higher persistence proba- bility (mclaughlin & noakes 1998), thus explaining the different fin sizes observed in the two studied barbel populations. similar to the pectoral fin, dorsal fin in cyprinids is inactive and generally folded down most of the time during steady swimming. however, this fin plays an important role in maintaining body stability during propulsion, countering minor perturbations induced by incoming flows (lauder & drucker 2004). subcarangiform swimmers, such as barbels, in the presence of more turbulent environments, need con- swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes stant adjustments of body position that is achieved by lateral force generation performed with the help of the dorsal fin that, in these situations, acts as a rudder (wood & bain 1995; lauder & drucker 2004). barbels from the permanent river exhibited a larger ‘rudder’ to facilitate the constant position adjustments due to the greater turbulence and flow, so they developed a higher dorsal fin observed for the temporary river population. fin, when compared with the shorter this study demonstrated the existence of a strong relationship between swimming performance, mor- phology and environment for the iberian barbel. simi- lar studies, focusing on different species, present comparable results. the higher swimming efficiency of a fusiform body shape and narrower caudal peduncle was also demonstrated for other european cyprinid species, namely carp (cyprinus carpio l.) and roach (rutilus rutilus l.), who showed consider- able differences in critical swimming speed due to the well-adapted body shape of the latter (ohlberger et al. 2006). in a study that compared the swimming ability of 37 warmwater stream fishes of texas and louisi- ana, leavy & bonner (2009) found that species inhab- iting riffle areas had higher swimming speeds and were more streamlined, with larger pectoral fins and height of dorsal fins exceeding body depth, than those with lower swim speed that inhabited pool areas. these results were particularly evident for cyprinid fish. using fixed-velocity swimming tests, ojanguren & bra~na (2003) found that juvenile brown_trouts (salmo_trutta l.) with less stout body and longer paired fins tended to endure the current for a longer time period. pakasmaa & piironen (2001) reared sal- mon and brown_trout in fast and slow water tanks and showed that these variations in water velocity were responsible for differences in morphological attributes such as the body stoutness and dorsal and caudal fin size. in their study, fish reared in fast velocity tanks were slimmer and had higher dorsal and caudal fins than the fishes reared in slow velocity tanks. this pat- tern of body shape and fin dimension is also fre- quently observed in marine fishes (e.g., reidy et al. 2000). in fact, perhaps the best known example of maximum swimming efficiency, the tunniform swim- ming mode performed by tuna and mackerel, for example, share some of the morphological characteris- tics identified in this set of studies as important for swimming performance, namely the well-streamlined body, the stiff and high caudal and dorsal fins and the narrower head and caudal peduncle (sfakiotakis et al. 1999). most of these studies, including the present one, globally reflect an environmental association, at different habitat scales, between fish’s body morphol- ogy and the reduction in hydrodynamic resistance and overall energy expenditure during locomotion. differ- ent habitats create different selective pressures on fish. in response, phenotypes are potentially adapting to maximise fitness in these environments (franssen 2011). given the different ecomorphological features observed in this study for barbel populations from per- manent and temporary rivers, which are influencing their respective locomotor performances, two different types of evolutionary mechanisms may be acting here, namely genetic differentiation between the two popu- lations or a high phenotypic plasticity exhibited by this species when facing environmental variability that can lead to a divergent natural selection (langerhans 2008). the observed phenotypic differences between the two populations are potentially attributable to environmental-induced morphological responses, par- ticularly associated with the different flow regimes, and their respective habitat and hydraulic characteris- tics, from where the tested fish came from. the rela- tive contribution of phenotypic plasticity and genetic components can be nearly equivalent on explaining phenotypic variation in stream fishes (franssen 2011; franssen et al. 2013). however, the nature of our data precludes us from assessing and quantifying how much of the observed phenotypic variability was due to genetic or environmental effects. further research on these two populations is needed to quantify the rel- ative contribution of these two mechanisms in the swimming performance and morphological variations that occurred between the two rivers. the native freshwater fish fauna of the iberian pen- insula is characterised by a low number of families, with most of the species belonging to the family cyp- rinidae, a high degree of regional diversification at the species level, and the greatest european percentage of endemism (doadrio 2001; cabral et al. 2005). in this region, there are a great number of species belonging to the same genus (especially luciobarbus sp. and chondrostoma sp. latu sensu), that occur in river sys- tems with distinct abiotic characteristics and are fre- quent targets of river restoration measures. therefore, future studies should be conducted for these species to analyse their swimming performances and body shape characteristics in distinct environments. the analysis of fish critical swimming speed and morphology and its relationship with river hydrology is particularly interesting because it can provide valuable informa- tion for environmental managers to understand and improve the regional specificity of common river res- toration measures, such as the construction and arrangement of fishways and the adequacy of instream flow manipulations (peake et al. 1997). for example, obtaining ucrit data for populations of the same spe- cies from distinct river basins may allow the definition of acceptable local water velocity limits within fish- ways for the target species (peake 2008; tudorache et al. 2008). in the same manner, instream flow altera- tions performed by dams or habitat enhancement pro- 255 alexandre et al. grammes should take into account the results from this study, especially for southern rivers, where flow incre- ments resulting in current velocity increases above the observed critical swimming speeds could difficult bar- bels’ migration and access to suitable spawning areas. acknowledgements the authors wish to thank pedro moreira, sabrina sales and tadeu pereira for their assistance during fish capture. we are also grateful to leonel gordo for the support on the geometric morphometric analysis. this work was financially supported by feder funds through the operational programme for competitiveness factors – compete and national funds through fct – foundation for science and technology under the strategic project pest-c/agr/ui0115/2011, and through a phd grant to c. m. alexandre (sfrh/bd/66081/2009). references adams, s.r. & parsons, g.r. 1998. laboratory-based mea- surements of swimming performance and related metabolic rates of field sampling smallmouth buffalo (ictiobus bubal- us): a study of seasonal changes. physiological zoology 71: 350–358. adams, d.c., rohlf, f.j. & slice, d. 2004. geometric mor- phometrics: ten years of progress following the “revolution”. italian journal of zoology 71: 5–16. aleev, y.g. 1969. function and gross morphology in fish. jerusalem: israel program for scientific translations. alexandre, c.m., quintella, b.r., silva, a.t., mateus, c.s., rom~ao, f., branco, p., ferreira, m.t. & almeida, p.r. 2013. use of electromyogram telemetry to assess the behavior of the iberian barbel (luciobarbus bocagei steindachner, 1864) in a pool-type fishway. ecological engineering 51: 191–202. arnold, g.p. & weihs, d. 1978. the hydrodynamics of rheo- taxis in the plaice (pleuronectes platessa). journal of experi- mental biology 75: 147–169. beacham, t.d. 1985. meristic and morphometric variation in pink salmon (oncorhynchus_gorbuscha) in southern british columbia and puget sound. canadian journal of zoology 63: 366–372. beamish, f.w.h. 1978. swimming capacity. in: hoar, w.s., randall, d.j., eds. fish physiology 7. new york: academic press, pp. 101–187. bell, w.h. & terhune, l.d.b. 1970. water tunnel designs for fisheries research. nanaimo: fisheries research board of canada. technical report 195. boily, p. & magnan, p. 2002. relationship between individual variation in morphological characters and swimming costs in brook charr (salvelinus_fontinalis) and yellow perch (perca flavescens). journal of experimental biology 205: 1031–1036. brett, j.r. 1964. the respiratory metabolism and swimming performance of young sockeye salmon. journal of fisheries research board of canada 21: 1183–1225. brizga, s., arthington, a., choy, s., craigie, n., mackay, s., poplawski, w., pusey, b. & werren, g. 2001. environmental flow report: pioneer valley. brisbane: water resource plan, natural resources and mines, queensland government. 256 cabral, m.j., almeida, j., almeida, p.r., dellinger, t., fer- rand de almeida, n., oliveira, m.e., palmeirim, j.m., que- iroz, a.i., rogado, l. & santos-reis, m. (eds.). 2005. livro vermelho dos vertebrados de portugal. lisboa: instituto de conservacß~ao da natureza. chai, p. & millard, d. 1997. flight and size constraints: hov- ering performance of large hummingbirds under maximum loading. journal of experimental biology 200: 2757–2763. collares-pereira, m.j., cowx, i.g., ribeiro, f., rodrigues, a. & rogado, l. 2000. threats imposed by water resource development schemes on the conservation of endangered fish species on the guadiana river basin in portugal. fish- eries management and ecology 7: 167–178. doadrio, i. 2001. atlas y libro rojo de los peces continentales de espa~na. madrid: museo nacional de ciencias naturales. drucker, e.g. & jensen, j.s. 1996. pectoral fin locomotion in the striped surfperch. i. kinematic effects of swimming speed and body size. journal of experimental biology 199: 2235–2242. drucker, e.g. & lauder, g.v. 2003. function of pectoral fins in rainbow trout: behavioral repertoire and hydrodynamic forces. journal of experimental biology 206: 813–826. franssen, n.r. 2011. anthropogenic habitat alteration induces rapid morphological divergence in a native stream fish. evo- lutionary applications 4: 791–804. franssen, n. r., harris, j., clark, s.r., schaefer, j. & stewart, l.k. 2013. shared and unique morphological responses of stream fishes to anthropogenic habitat alteration. proceedings of the royal society b: biological sciences 280: no. 1752. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2012.2715. gasith, a. & resh, v.h. 1999. streams in mediterranean cli- mate regions: abiotic influences and biotic responses to pre- dictable seasonal events. annual review of ecology systematics 30: 51–81. gatz, a.j. 1979. ecological morphology of freshwater stream fishes. tulane studies in zoology and botany 21: 91–124. haas, t.c., blum, m.j. & heins, d.c. 2010. morphological responses of a stream fish to water impoundment. biology letters 6: 803–806. hammer, c. 1995. fatigue and exercise tests with fish. com- parative biochemistry and physiology a 112: 1–20. hawkins, d.k. & quinn, t.p. 1996. critical swimming veloc- ity and associated morphology of juvenile coastal cutthroat trout (on- corhynchus mykiss), and their hybrids. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 53: 1487–1496. (oncorhynchus clarki clarki), steelhead trout hickey, j.t. & salas, j.d. 1995. environmental effects of extreme floods. perugia, italy: u.s. italy research work- shop on the hydrometeorology, impacts and management of extreme floods. hochachka, p.w. 1961. the effect of physical training on oxygen debt and glycogen reserves in trout. canadian jour- nal of zoolology 39: 767–776. inag, ip. 2008. tipologia de rios em portugal continental no ^ambito da implementacß~ao da directiva quadro da agua – caracterizacß~ao abiotica. lisboa: ministerio do ambiente, do ordenamento do territorio e do desenvolvimento regional, instituto da agua. langerhans, r.b. 2008. predictability of phenotypic differenti- ation across flow regimes in fishes. integrative and compar- ative biology 48: 750–768. swimming capacity of barbel in rivers with distinct flow regimes langerhans, r.b. 2009. trade-off between steady and unsteady swimming underlies predator-driven divergence in gambusia affinis. journal of evolutionary biology 22: 1057–1075. langherans, r.b., layman, c.a., langherans, a.k. & dwitt, t.j. 2003. habitat-associated morphological divergence in two neotropical fish species. biologica journal of the lin- nean society 80: 689–698. lauder, g.v. & drucker, e.g. 2004. morphology and experi- mental hydrodynamics of fish fin control surfaces. journal of oceanic engineering 29: 556–571. leavy, t.r. & bonner, t.h. 2009. relationships among swimming ability, current velocity association and morphol- ogy for freshwater lotic fishes. north american journal of fisheries management 29: 72–83. lighthill, m.j. 1969. hydromechanics of aquatic animal pro- pulsion. annual review on fluid mechanics 1: 413–466. lindsey, c.c. 1978. form, function and locomotory habits in fish. in: hoar, w.s., randall, d.j., eds. fish physiology 7. new york: academic press, pp. 1–100. lobon-cervia, j. & fernandez-delgado, c. 1984. on the biol- ogy of the barbel (barbus barbus bocagei) in the jarama river. folia zoologica 33: 371–384. magalh~aes, m.f. 1992. feeding ecology of the iberian cypri- nid barbus bocagei steindachner, 1865 in a lowland river. journal of fish biology 40: 123–133. mas-marti, e., garcia-berthou, e., sabater, s., tomanova, s. & mu~noz, i. 2010. comparing fish assemblages and trophic ecology of permanent and intermittent reaches in a mediter- ranean stream. hydrobiologia 657: 167–180. mateus, c.s., quintella, b.r. & almeida, p.r. 2008. the crit- ical swimming speed of iberian barbel barbus bocagei in relation to size and sex. journal of fish biology 73: 1783– 1789. mclaughlin, r.l. & noakes, d.l. 1998. going against the flow: an examination of the propulsive movements made by young brook_trout in streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 853–860. minckley, w.l. & meffe, g.k. 1987. differential selection by flooding in stream-fish communities of the arid ameri- can southwest. in: matthews, w.j. & heins, d.c., eds. community and evolutionary ecology of north american stream fishes. norman: university of oklahoma press, pp. 93–104. moyle, p.b. & cech, j.j. 1996. fishes: an introduction to ich- thyology. new jersey: prentice hall. m€uller, u.k., stamhuis, e.j. & videler, j.j. 2000. hydrody- namics of unsteady fish swimming and the effects of body size: comparing the flow fields of fish larvae and adults. journal of experimental biology 203: 193–206. ohlberger, j., staaks, g. & h€olker, f. 2006. swimming efficiency and the influence of morphology on swimming costs in fishes. journal of comparative physiology b 176: 17–25. ojanguren, a.f. & bra~na, f. 2003. effects of size and morphology on swimming performance in juvenile brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.). ecology of freshwater fish 12: 241– 246. page, l.m. & swofford, d.l. 1984. morphological correlates of ecological specialization in darters. environmental biol- ogy of fishes 11: 139–159. pakasmaa, s. & piironen, j. 2001. water velocity shapes juve- nile salmonids. evolutionary ecology 14: 721–730. peake, s.j. 2008. swimming performance and behavior of fish species endemic to newfoundland and labrador: a literature review for the purpose of establishing design and water velocity criteria for fishways and culverts. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 2843: v + 52. peake, s., mckinley, r.s. & scruton, d.a. 1997. swimming performance of various freshwater newfoundland salmonids relative to habitat selection and fishway design. journal of fish biology 51: 710–723. pettersson, l.b. & hedenstrom, a. 2000. energetics, cost reduc- tion and functional consequences of fish morphology. proceed- ings of the royal society of london b 267: 759–764. plaut, i. 2001. critical swimming speed: its ecological relevance. comparative biochemistry and physiology a 131: 41–50. poff, n.l. & allan, j.d. 1995. functional organizational of stream fish assemblages in relation to hydrological variabil- ity. ecology 76: 606–627. poff, n.l. & ward, j.v. 1989. implications of streamflow var- iability and predictability for lotic community structure: a regional analysis of streamflow patterns. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 46: 1805–1818. poff, n.l., allan, j.d., bain, m.b., karr, j.r., prestegaard, k.l., richter, b.d., sparks, r.e. & stromberg, j. 1997. the natural flow regime. bioscience 47: 769–784. rayner, t.s., pusey, b.j. & pearson, r.g. 2009. spatio-tem- poral dynamics of fish feeding in the lower mulgrave river, north-eastern queensland: the influence of seasonal flood- ing, instream productivity and invertebrate abundance. mar- ine and freshwater research 2060: 97–111. reidy, s.p., kerr, s.r. & nelson, j.a. 2000. aerobic and anaerobic swimming performance of individual atlantic cod. journal of experimental biology 203: 347–357. richter, b.d., baumgartner, j.v., braun, d.p. & powell, j. 1998. how much water does a river need? freshwater biol- ogy 37: 231–249. rodrõguez-ruiz, a. & granado-lorencio, c. 1992. spawning period and migration of three species of cyprinids in a stream with mediterranean regimen (sw spain). journal of fish biology 41: 545–556. rohlf, f.j. 1993. relative warp analysis and an example of its application to mosquito wings. in: marcus, l.f., bello, e. & garcia-valdecasas, a., eds. contributions to morphometrics. madrid: monografias del museo nacional de ciencias natu- rales 8. rohlf, f.j. 1996. tpsdig. program for digitizing images for analysis by thin-plate splines, version 1.08. department of ecology & evolution, state university of new york. stony brook (available by anonymous ftp from http://life.bio.sun- ysb.edu/morph/morph.html). rohlf, f.j. 1997. tpsrelw. program for analyzing landmark data with thin-plate splines using relative warps, version 1.14. department of ecology & evolution, state university of new york. stony brook (available by anonymous ftp from http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/morph.html). rohlf, f.j. 1998. tpsregr. program to conduct multivariate multiple regression analysis of shape and size data, version 2.15. department of ecology & evolution, state university of new york. stony brook (available by anonymous ftp from http://life.bio.sunysb.edu/morph/morph.html). 257 alexandre et al. rohlf, f.j. & slice, d. 1990. extensions of the procrustes method for the optimal superimposition of landmarks. sys- tematic zoology 31: 40–59. scarnecchia, d.l. 1988. the importance of streamlining in influencing fish community structure in channelized and unchannelized reaches of a prairie stream. regulated rivers: research and management 2: 155–166. schaefer, j., duvernell, d. & kreiser, b. 2011. shape variabil- ity in topminnows (fundulus notatus species complex) along the river continuum. biological journal of the linnean society 103: 612–621. scott, m.k. & magoulick, d.d. 2008. swimming performance of five warmwater stream fish species. transactions of the american fisheries society 137: 209–215. sfakiotakis, m., lane, d.m. & davies, j.b. 1999. review of fish swimming modes for aquatic locomotion. journal of oceanic engineering 24: 237–252. shepherd, g. 1991. meristic and morphometric variation in black sea bass north of cape hatteras, north carolina. north american journal of fisheries management 11: 139–148. silva, a.t., santos, j.m., ferreira, m.t., pinheiro, a.n. & ka- topodis, c. 2011. effects of water velocity and turbulence on the behavior of iberian barbell (luciobarbus bocagei, steindachner 1864) in an experimental pool-type fishway. river research and applications 27: 360–373. silva, a.t., santos, j.m., ferreira, m.t., pinheiro, a.n. & katopodis, c. 2012. passage efficiency of offset and straight orifices for upstream movements of iberian barbel in a pool-type fishway. river research and applications 28: 529– 542. svanback, r. & eklov, p. 2004. morphology in perch affects habitat specific feeding efficiency. functional ecology 18: 503–510. swain, d.p., ridell, b.e. & murray, c.b. 1991. morphologi- cal differences between hatchery and wild populations of coho salmon (oncorhyncus kisutch): environmental versus genetic origin. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 48: 1783–1791. taylor, e.b. & mcphail, j.d. 1985. variation in burst and prolonged swimming performance among british columbia populations of coho salmon oncorhynchus_kisutch. cana- dian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 42: 2029– 2033. tudorache, c., viaenen, p., blust, r., vereechen, h. & de boeck, g. 2008. a comparison of swimming capacity and energy use in seven european freshwater fish species. ecol- ogy of freshwater fishes 17: 284–291. wainwright, p., bellwood, d.r. & westneat, m.w. 2002. ecomorphology of locomotion in labrid fish. environmental biology of fishes 65: 47–62. ward, d.l., schultz, a.a. & matson, p.g. 2003. differences in swimming ability and behavior in response to high water velocities among native and non-native fishes. environmen- tal biology of fishes 68: 87–92. webb, p.w. 1989. station-holding by three species of benthic fish. journal of experimental biology 145: 303–320. webb, p.w. 1993. swimming. in: evans, d.h., ed. the physiology of fishes. boca raton, fl: crc press, pp. 47–73. westneat, m.w. 1996. functional morphology of aquatic flight in fish: kinematics electromyography, and mechanical modeling of labriform locomotion. american zoology 36: 582–598. wood, b.m. & bain, m.b. 1995. morphology and microhabi- tat use in stream fish. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 52: 1487–1498. 258  