ecology of freshwater fish 2017: 26: 34–41 ó 2015 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish interspecific competition between the round goby, neogobius melanostomus, and the logperch, percina caprodes, in the duluth-superior harbour jared r. leino, allen f. mensinger biology department, university of minnesota, duluth, 1035 kirby drive, duluth, mn 55812, usa accepted for publication july 9, 2015 abstract – the laurentian great lakes have been the site of numerous aquatic invasive species such as the sea lamprey, zebra mussel and round goby. to further understand interactions between invasive and native species in situ, competitive interactions between native logperch (percina caprodes) and invasive round goby (neogobius melanostomus) were examined using submerged enclosures in the duluth-superior harbour. experiments were conducted on rocky or sandy substrate throughout the spring and summer months. trials consisted of single fish, paired conspecifics or round goby/logperch pairs with weight change determined after 28 days. the round gobies were able to outcompete and/or negatively affect logperch on rocky substrates as a direct result of round goby/ logperch interactions, as logperch fared well when round gobies were excluded from the enclosures. although there is evidence that round gobies exclude logperch from rocky substrates, the logperch population remains close to pre- invasion levels in the predominantly soft-bottomed harbour. the continued coexistence of the logperch with the round goby is attributed to the vastly greater area of soft-bottom vs. rocky substrate in the harbour, with the round gobies in the soft bottom younger and smaller than those in the rocky substrate. recent evidence suggests that the round goby population is declining on the soft substrates indicating that the two populations will continue to coexist in the harbour. key words: invasive species; lake superior; cage studies; competition introduction the round goby, neogobius melanostomus, is an invasive fish species to the laurentian great lakes that was first discovered in the st. clair river in 1990 (jude et al. 1992), and spread throughout all five lau- rentian great lakes within 5 years of this initial dis- covery (jude 1997). contaminated ballast water from transoceanic vessels appears to be responsible for the invasions as the fish originated in the ponto-caspian region of eurasia (ghedotti et al. 1995; brown & ste- pien 2009). secondary invasions into the great lakes tributaries have been noted (kornis & vander zanden 2010; kornis et al. 2013) with a density-dependent mechanism of upstream dispersal by round gobies, although the vector(s) remain undetermined (kornis et al. 2012, 2014). facilitating this movement aggressive behaviour, high fecundity and habitat plasticity have been implicated as prevailing factors behind the explosive growth of the round goby popu- lation and subsequent local extirpation of native ben- thic species (macinnis & corkum 2000). competition with round goby for spawning habitat led to subse- quent recruitment failure of mottled sculpin (cottus bairdii) populations in calumet harbour of lake michigan (janssen & jude 2001), and mottled sculpin and johnny darter (etheostoma nigrum) trawl catches declined in lake michigan following round goby invasion (lauer et al. 2004). furthermore, the round goby is hypothesised to be at least partially responsible correspondence: a. f. mensinger, biology department, university of minnesota, duluth, 1035 kirby drive, duluth, mn 55812, usa. e-mail: amensing@d.umn.edu 34 doi: 10.1111/eff.12247 for the collapse of the deepwater demersal fish com- munity in lake huron (riley et al. 2008). although the detrimental effect of the round goby on native populations has been well documented, the exact mechanisms by which they outcompete or exclude native species in the field remains to be eluci- dated. several laboratory studies have addressed inter- specific interactions and indicated that round gobies can aggressively displace mottled sculpin or logperch from shelters (dubs & corkum 1996; balshine et al. 2005) and outcompete native fish for food resources (bergstrom & mensinger 2009). in addition, much of the focus has been on rocky bottoms and the impact of the round goby on soft sediment remains to be determined. several reports have indicated that high densities of round gobies on hard substrates will drive juveniles into suboptimal, soft sediment habitat (ray & corkum 2001; johnson et al. 2005). however, few in situ studies other than population surveys have been conducted. the round goby pre- fers rocky habitat (ray & corkum 2001; young et al. 2010); its population and subsequent effect on native species are therefore difficult to quantify using traditional trawling methods. for example, the impact of the round goby on the overall abundance of native fishes in the duluth-superior harbour remains largely unknown. the round goby was discovered in duluth in 1995 and has slowly expanded its range through- out the harbour, the st. louis river estuary and the st. louis river upstream to the first barrier (fond du lac dam). a mark recapture study using fish traps in the harbour on rocky substrate from 2009 through 2012 revealed that 98% of the catch (n=>15,000 fish) consisted of round gobies (lynch & mensinger 2012). however, off shore trawls continued to find round gobies and several species of native benthic fish, including logperch (percina caprodes), occupy- ing the soft-bottom communities (bergstrom et al. 2008). previous studies indicate that round goby will outcompete native logperch populations for habitat and food, yet several species of native fish have not shown significant population changes on the soft-bot- tom community since the round goby invasion (leino & mensinger, unpublished) which is consistent with benthic fish populations noted in great lakes tribu- taries (kornis et al. 2013). the objective of this study was to extend intra- and interspecific laboratory stud- ies to the field to determine the interactions between a native benthic species (logperch) that has been extirpated from rocky habitats and the invasive round goby on both sand and rocky substrates. material and methods and study area two shallow (average depth approximately 1 m) nearshore each paralleling approximately areas, competition between the round goby and logperch 0 0 12″n; 92°06 100 m of shoreline, were selected for competition studies near rice’s point, minnesota in the duluth- superior harbour (46°45 27″w). the eastern site was primarily rocky bottom and domi- nated by round gobies while the second area, located 500 m west, was soft sediment and contained both round gobies and logperch. wolman pebble counts were used to determine the substrate composition at each site. the rocky site was characterised by 50% large cobble (64–256 mm diameter) interspersed with 30% gravel (2–64 mm) and 20% sand (<2 mm). the sandy site consisted of 85% sand with intermittent cobble (10%) and gravel (5%). fish enclosures were constructed from 2.5 cm diameter pvc tubing overlaid with black plastic mesh screening (4.0 mm square opening) and mea- sured 40 cm 9 55 cm 9 25 cm. the bottom of each enclosure was covered with the appropriate composi- tion of cobble, sand and gravel for each site and the material mixed to ensure random distribution. the cages were submerged in approximately 1 m of water at each site and spaced at least 3 m from adjacent enclosures. logperch and round gobies were collected from the duluth-superior harbour by trapping, netting, beach seining or bottom trawling throughout the spring and summer. fish were maintained with con- specifics in aerated coolers and transported to the experimental site within 24 h of capture. fish weight (determined to 0.1 g) and total length (tl) (mm) were determined and the round gobies sexed (sex was unable to be determined for logperch). the log- perch used in the study (n = 101) ranged from 61 mm to 112 mm tl (median 80.0; 75.0, 87.0 mm) and 2.2–6.0 g (median 4.0; 3.6, 5.0 g). round goby (n = 117) ranged from 63 to 110 mm tl (median 83.0; 75.0, 87.0 mm) and from 2.9 to 12.0 g (median 5.8; 5.1, 7.1 g). all treatments con- tained representative lengths and weights from the range tested. each enclosure contained one of the following experimental groups: (i) single species; (ii) intraspeci- fic pair; and (iii) interspecific pair. for intraspecific competition, fish were paired with a conspecific of similar size (5 mm) with a small incision made in the pectoral fin of one of the pair for recognition of individual fish, and all round gobies were paired with members of the same sex. for interspecific competi- tion, logperch were paired with a round goby of simi- lar length (5 mm). trials were conducted both on rocky and sandy substrate and the cages left undis- turbed for 4 weeks. fish then were removed from the enclosures, identified, weighed, measured and sacri- ficed with an overdose of 0.05% ms-222. all experi- ments and procedures conformed to institutional animal care protocols. 35 leino & mensinger analysis all traps were in situ for the same time (28 days), and therefore, weight change was determined by dividing the end weight by the initial weight. in the paired trials, if one of the fish was missing, the data were discarded. as the majority of the data failed normality tests (shapiro–wilk), nonparametric statis- tical analysis was used. values are reported as the median with the 25% and 75% quartiles in the fol- lowing format (median; 25%, 75%). all percentages were arcsine transformed prior to statistical analysis. mann–whitney rank-sum tests or kruskal–wallis analysis of variance with dunn pairwise multiple comparison procedures were used to compare differ- ent treatments and all statistical analysis performed with sigmaplot version 12.5. results the enclosures proved effective in maintaining the fish with 85% surviving the 4 week trials. an equal number of cages containing single fish of each spe- cies were found empty; however, carcasses were absent, and it is unclear if the missing fish escaped or died. in the paired trials, the majority of the cages with missing fish were empty as opposed to containing a single fish, suggesting that fish were escaping the enclosures and not being killed by cage mate. single fish trials twenty-seven (15 rock, 12 sand) single fish trials were conducted with the round goby. male fish were placed in 67% of the enclosures, and no significance difference was detected between male and female weight changes on either substrate (mann–whitney, p = 0.707), allowing the gender data to be pooled. round gobies on the rocky substrate lost a median  11.3% ( 14.7%,  6.1%) of body weight, which individual was significantly greater (mann–whitney, p < 0.001) than conspecifics on sand ( 1.3%;  5.6%, 14.5%). seventeen (9 rock, 8 sand) individual logperch trials were also conducted. logperch gained weight at both locations with fish on sandy bottom gaining slightly more weight (12.3%; 4.5%, 18.6%) than those on rocky substrate (7.8%; 3.1%, 9.7%); however, there was no significant difference (mann whitney, p = 0.180) in weight gain between the two sites (fig. 1). the logperch weight change was sig- nificantly different than the round goby (mann–whit- ney, p < 0.001) on the rocky site, but there was no significant difference (mann–whitney, p = 0.174) between the species in weight change at the sandy sites. conspecific pair trials twenty-nine (14 rock, 15 sand) round goby pairs were placed in the enclosures with 12 cages on each substrate containing males and the rest enclosing female pairs. no significant difference was found in male and female weight change on either substrate (mann–whitney, p = 0.452), and the data were pooled. when round gobies were paired with con- specifics, both showed weight loss independent of habitat. on the rocky habitat, the median weight loss per fish was  11.3% ( 13.7%,  8.6%) with only 6 of the 28 fish exhibiting weight gain. the median loss ( 4.1%:  8.0%, 1.9%) on the sand was signifi- cantly less (mann–whitney, p < 0.001); however, only 8 of the 30 fish gained weight (fig. 2). twenty-six intraspecific logperch trials were con- ducted with 20 cages placed on rocky substrate. log- perch lost weight at both sites with fish on the rocky site losing significantly less weight ( 3.1%;  4.6%,  0.4%) (mann–whitney, p < 0.001) than the sandy site ( 6.0%;  10.2%,  0.7%), with less than 15% of the individuals at either site showing weight gain (fig. 2). logperch lost significantly less weight than round gobies on the rocky substrate (mann–whitney, fig. 1. single fish trials. the median weight change after 28 days is shown for single round gobies (open box) and logperch (grey box) on both rock (left panel) and sand substrate (right panel). the line within the box marks the median and the boundary of the boxes indicates the 25th percentile and 75th percentile. whiskers below and above the box indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles. letters indicate significantly different weight change (mann–whitney, p < 0.001). 36 competition between the round goby and logperch fig. 2. conspecific pair trials. the median weight change after 28 days is shown for paired round gobies (open box) and paired logperch (grey box) on both rock (left panel) and sand (right panel) substrate. the line within the box marks the median and the boundary of the boxes indicates the 25th percentile and 75th percentile. whiskers below and above the box indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles. p < 0.001); however, there was no significant differ- ence between the species at the sandy sites (mann whitney, p = 0.510). different conspecifics were substrates (round goby, mann–whitney, p = 0.055; logperch, mann–whitney, p = 0.095). compared the on interspecific pair trials substrate thirty-two (14 rock and 18 sand) trials were con- ducted to examine interspecific interactions. approxi- mately 67% of the traps contained male round gobies; however, no difference was found in male and female growth rates (mann–whitney, p = 0.723) and the data were combined for the analysis. the round gobies fared better than the logperch on both substrates. on the rocks, the round gobies lost signifi- cantly less body weight ( 3.6%;  7.7%, 1.7%) than logperch ( 8.5%:  13.0%,  5.2%) (mann–whitney, p = 0.029). the round goby fared better in 8 of the 14 enclosures on rock substrate with 2 enclosures showing equal growth (within 0.5% body weight change). on the sand, round gobies gained a median of 3.0% ( 1.5%, 6.0%) body weight which repre- (mann–whitney, sented a p = 0.026) in comparison with logperch ( 5.1%;  11.4%, 3.1%). the round goby out gained the log- perch in 10 of the 18 sand enclosures with four addi- tional enclosures showing equal growth (within 0.5% body weight change) (fig. 3). no significant differ- ence was change when significant difference in weight observed fig. 3. interspecific pair trials. the median weight change after 28 days is shown for enclosures containing a round goby (open box) and logperch (grey box) on rocky (left panel) and sandy (right panel) substrate. the line within the box marks the median and the boundary of the boxes indicates the 25th percentile and 75th percentile. whiskers below and above the box indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles. letters indicate significantly different weight change (mann–whitney, p = 0.029, rock; p = 0.026 sand). on rocky substrate, round gobies had significantly less weight loss when paired with logperch than when paired with conspecifics or when alone (kruskal–wallis, p < 0.001). on the sand substrate, round gobies had significantly greater weight loss (kruskal–wallis, when paired with conspecifics p < 0.001) than the other round goby trials. only when round gobies were paired with logperch on the sand did they gain weight (fig. 4). single logperch both on the rocky and sand sub- strates gained significantly more weight than when paired with round goby (kruskal–wallis, p < 0.001). on sandy substrates, single logperch gained signifi- cantly more weight than logperch in the other two groups (kruskal–wallis, p = 0.008) (fig. 5). discussion to further understand interactions between invasive and native species in situ, competitive interactions between native logperch (p. caprodes) and invasive round goby (n. melanostomus) were examined using 37 leino & mensinger submerged enclosures in the duluth-superior harbour. this study confirmed that round gobies can outcom- pete and/or negatively affect logperch on rocky sub- strate as a result of round goby/logperch interactions. the submerged enclosures allowed for animals to be maintained under comparable water conditions on two different types of substrates while allowing their retrieval at the end of the study. however, caution needs to be applied to insure that the cage itself did not influence animal physiology (connell 1983). cages restrict foraging area and if insufficient food resources enter the cage, negative effects can ensue. fouling can also limit food availability or water flow through the structure. however, in the current study, the caging only exhibited modest fouling, and the mesh unimpeded throughout each trial. amphipods, crayfish, chirono- mids, tubenose (proterorhinus semilunaris) and round gobies often were found in and on the cages with the invertebrates common in the diet of both species especially in shal- low waters and in the absence of mussels (french & jude 2001). many fishes displayed weight gain, indi- cating that sufficient food was available in the enclo- sures, at least in some areas. the cages also proved (<50 mm tl) relatively openings remained and juvenile 38 fig. 4. round goby summary. the median weight change is shown for all three round goby trials (single fish, intra- and interspecific competition) on both rocky (left panel) and sandy (right panel) substrate. the line within the box marks the median, and the boundary of the boxes indicates the 25th percentile and 75th percentile. whiskers below and above the box indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles. letters indicate significantly different medians in each panel (kruskal–wallis, p < 0.001). fig. 5. logperch summary. the median weight change is shown for all three logperch trials (single fish, intra- and interspecific competition) on both rocky (left panel) and sandy (right panel) substrate. the line within the box marks the median and the boundary of the boxes indicates the 25th percentile and 75th percentile. whiskers below and above the box indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles. letters indicate significantly different medians in each panel (kruskal–wallis, p < 0.001, rock; p = 0.008 sand). reliable in containing both species as >85% of the fish were recovered after 4 week trials. due to the prolonged submergence and the desire not to disturb the inhabitants, it could not be determined whether the missing fish died or escaped, because no car- casses were found. many of the intra- or interspecific cages with absent fish were missing both occupants, suggesting that the fish were able to escape these cages and were not being killed by other inhabitant. in addition, the fin incisions made in the paired trials did not impact swimming or lead to pathological problems. single fish interactions although the main focus of the study was to examine the interspecific interactions, single fish was placed in the enclosures to determine the effects of the cages on fish growth. single logperch gained weight both on sandy and rocky substrate, the enclosure was not inhibiting food availability or fish growth. long-term (5+ years) mark and recapture studies on rocky substrate, near the sites in the cur- rent experiment, yielded over 98% round gobies (of 15,000 fish) without capturing a single logperch indicating that (lynch & mensinger 2012, 2013). while this may be partially attributed to gear bias, the minnow traps proved effective in capturing native benthic species including logperch in other parts of the st. louis river. however, when protected from round goby interaction, the logperch grew well in this habitat, suggesting that their absence can be attributed pri- marily to the round goby, and not other abiotic or other biotic factors. in contrast to the weight gains exhibited by the logperch, single round gobies basically maintained weight (median change of  1.3%) on the sand but lost significant weight (median change  11.3%) on the rocky substrate. the lack of growth for the round goby on the soft substrate could be partially explained by different food resources available on the sand or constraints on foraging because of the cage. the weight loss of the round goby in the rocks con- trasted with field studies that documented continual growth of the round goby throughout the spring and summer months on rocky substrate (lynch & men- singer 2013). one possibility is that the high density of round gobies outside the cage consumed the avail- able food before it had a chance to get into the cage. however, if food was limiting in the environment, it would have been expected that the mark/recapture study would have contained a percentage of round gobies that exhibited negative growth, which was not the case. the round gobies on the sand fared signifi- cantly better, as did round gobies that were paired with logperch on rocky habitat, suggesting food limi- tation was not the only possible factor contributing to weight loss by single round gobies on rocky substrate. another possibility is that high densities of sexually mature round gobies in the rocky area may have contributed to round goby weight loss if the male fish in the enclosures expended energy to attract mates or establish and/or defend territory from the small, immature round gobies that could access the enclosures. these small round gobies often were observed on top of the traps prior to retrieval. it is hypothesised the cage top provided a refuge from the larger round gobies on the substrate. when the enclo- sures were retrieved, it appeared that the small round gobies entered the cages. however, less than 30% of the retrieved enclosures contained the small round gobies and based on laboratory observations, is unlikely that the large residence round gobies would have tolerated the presence of the intruders very long. the small round gobies could have intercepted food before it entered the enclosure and caused the resi- dent fish to expend energy to drive them away; how- ever, any density changes inside the enclosure where hypothesised to be transitory rather than permanent and have minimal effect on the number of fish con- tained in each enclosure. in addition, the female it competition between the round goby and logperch round gobies in the study may have spawned either in the enclosure or through the mesh contributing to further weight loss. we hypothesise that interactions with other round gobies through or within enclosures, combined with high population densities that may have limited food flow into the enclosure, resulted in the observed neg- ative growth rate of single round gobies on rocky habitat. intraspecific competition logperch pairs lost weight on both substrates which contrasted sharply with weight gains evidenced by single fish. in the laboratory, very few interactions between logperch pairs were observed, and therefore, aggressive behaviour or other types of negative inter- actions in the enclosures were unlikely (bergstrom et al. 2008). as single logperch gained weight during the same time and locations, the weight loss exhib- ited by the pairs may be a result of competition for a limited food supply. this would be consistent with the overall density of logperch in the harbour as trawling studies have indicated logperch exist at lower densities (<0.01/m2) than in the enclosures. the median weight loss for round gobies pairs exceeded 10% on the rocky substrates, which con- trasted sharply with the minimal weight loss observed on the sand flats. round gobies are known for their aggressive interactions, and while weight loss may have been expected for one of the pair, it was surpris- ing that every fish lost weight. the significantly greater weight loss on the rocky habitat may be the result of competition for shelter/substrate in the enclosure. in addition, competition for food or inter- actions with adult round gobies outside the cage or small (<4 cm) fish that could transit the cage may have also been a factor. the enclosures on the sand contained minimal habitat that was further degraded by sand deposition during the experiments which may have reduced the aggressive territorial the lower population density of round gobies in this area reduced the chances of interactions through the enclosures and may have contributed to less weight loss than in the rocky substrate. in addition, interactions. interspecific interactions laboratory studies showed that round gobies would outcompete the logperch for shelter and food; how- ever, these studies used fish pellets added once daily that proved relatively easy for the round goby to monopolise. the fish in the current experiments needed to adapt to temporally variable food. as log- perch has been shown to have greater reaction and 39 leino & mensinger strike distances for live prey than the round goby, their foraging for food in the wild had the potential to offset the round gobies aggressive interactions (bergstrom & mensinger 2009). however, the inter- specific trials showed the ability of the round goby to dominate resources and/or negatively impact logperch through interactions in the field. although the round goby on the hard substrate had minor weight loss, the logperch lost significantly more weight than in other trials conducted on the rock substrate. as these round gobies fared better than single or pairs of round gob- ies, it is hypothesised that these fish focused on dom- inating the logperch and acquiring resources that partially mitigated interactions with conspecifics outside the cage. the diets of the two species show considerable overlap in shallow waters, especially when mussels are in low abundance (french & jude 2001), suggesting that the round goby outcompeted the logperch for food. on the soft substrates, the round goby gained weight while logperch lost signifi- cantly more weight during interspecific interactions. however, as logperch pairs also lost weight on the soft substrate, it is unclear if the loss in logperch weight was due to fish density or round goby interac- tions. the greater growth exhibited by the round gob- ies on the sand was again attributed to minimal interactions with other round gobies due to lower population densities on the sand flats. the round goby has extirpated native benthic spe- cies in near shore rocky areas and maintains a sub- stantial presence on the soft-bottom community. however, a long-term trawling survey (1989–2011) that included sampling prior to the introduction of the round goby indicates that although the preround goby logperch population was slightly higher the result was not statistically different (leino and men- singer, unpublished) with the logperch retaining a presence on the soft-bottom community. it was hypothesised that the continued presence of the log- perch on the soft-bottom communities was attributed to sensory advantages and that the fish could be able to at least compete with the round gobies on the soft bottom (bergstrom & mensinger 2009). as the log- perch is not active at night, it may be possible that any sensory advantage during the day is mitigated by the ability of the round goby to successfully forage throughout the day and night. the question arises to why the round gobies with their ability to dominate the logperch both on rocky and sandy substrates have not extirpated the logperch from the sand flats. the coexistence of the logperch on the soft-bottom communities may be attributable to the greater area of soft substrate compared to man- made structures or rocky areas lining the shores. as the round gobies need hard substrate for reproduction (ray & corkum 2001), the greatest densities of 40 round gobies are found in the near-shore rock com- munities, and consequently, the largest and arguably fittest individuals are found near shore (lynch & mensinger 2012). the round gobies on the sand flats are comprised of smaller or younger fish than found on the rocky substrate (bergstrom et al. 2008; lynch & mensinger 2013) which may lessen the impact on the logperch. the effects of the virtual exclusion of the logperch from the rocky habitats have not been observed in the soft-bottom populations. as the round goby population is in a slight decline since 2006 (leino and mensinger, unpublished), and the logperch continue to occupy the soft bottom, it appears that the two populations will continue to coexist. the study confirms that round gobies can outcom- pete and/or negatively affect logperch on rocky sub- strate. this appears to be a direct result of round goby/logperch interactions as logperch fared well during the same time and in the same habitats when round gobies were excluded from the enclosures. however, the logperch population continues to inha- bit the soft bottom and continual monitoring will be needed to observe the long-term effects of round goby introduction on the native benthic fish in the soft-bottom communities. acknowledgements support for the project was provided by the minnesota legis- lature 2010, chapter 362, section 2, subdivision 06d titled ‘bioacoustic traps for management of round goby’ with provided funds from minnesota’s environment and natural resources trust fund. references balshine, s., verma, a., chant, v. & theysmeyer, t. 2005. competitive interactions between round gobies and log- perch. journal of great lakes research 31: 68–77. bergstrom, m.a. & mensinger, a.f. 2009. interspecific resource competition between the invasive round goby and three native species: logperch, slimy sculpin, and spoonhead sculpin. transactions of the american fisheries society 138: 1009–1017. bergstrom, m.a., evrard, l.m. & mensinger, a.f. 2008. distribution, abundance, and range of the round goby, apol- lina melanostoma, in the duluth-superior harbor and st. louis river estuary, 1998-2004. journal of great lakes research 34: 535–543. brown, j.e. & stepien, c.a. 2009. invasion genetics of the eurasian round goby in north america: tracing sources and spread patterns. molecular ecology 18: 64–79. connell, j.h. 1983. on the prevalence and relative impor- tance of interspecific competition: evidence from field experiments. the american naturalist 122: 661–696. dubs, d. & corkum, l. 1996. behavioral interactions between round gobies (neogobius melanostomus) and mottled scul- pins (cottus bairdi). journal of great lakes research 22: 838–844. french, j. & jude, d. 2001. diets and diet overlap of nonindige- nous gobies and small benthic native fishes co-inhabiting the st. clair river, michigan. journal of great lakes research 27: 300–311. ghedotti, m., smihula, j. & smith, g. 1995. zebra mussel predation by round gobies in the laboratory. journal of great lakes research 21: 665–669. janssen, j. & jude, d. 2001. recruitment failure of mottled in calumet harbor, southern lake sculpin cottus bairdi induced by the newly introduced round goby michigan, neogobius melanostomus. journal of great lakes research 27: 319–328. johnson, t.b., allen, m., corkum, l.d. & lee, v.a. 2005. comparison of methods needed to estimate population size of round gobies (neogobius melanostomus) in western lake erie. journal of great lakes research 31: 78–86. jude, d.j. 1997. round gobies: cyberfish of the third mille- nium. great lakes research review 3: 27–34. jude, d.j., reider, r.h. & smith, g.r. 1992. establishment of gobiidae in the great lakes basin. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 49: 416–421. kornis, m.s. & vander zanden, m.j. 2010. forecasting the distribution of the invasive round goby (neogobius melanos- tomus) in wisconsin tributaries to lake michigan. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 67: 553–562. kornis, m.s., mercado-silva, n. & vander zanden, m.j. 2012. twenty years of invasion: a review of round goby neogobius melanostomus biology, spread and ecological implications. journal of fish biology 80: 235–285. kornis, m.s., sharma, s. & vander zanden, m.j. 2013. invasion success and impact of an invasive fish, round goby, in great lakes tributaries. diversity and distributions 19: 184–198. competition between the round goby and logperch kornis, m.s., carlson, j., lehrer-brey, g. & vander zanden, m.j. 2014. experimental evidence that ecological effects of an invasive fish are reduced at high densities. oecologia 175: 325–334. lauer, t., allen, p. & mccomish, t. 2004. changes in mot- tled sculpin and johnny darter trawl catches after the appear- ance of round gobies in the indiana waters of lake michigan. transactions of the american fisheries society 133: 185–189. lynch, m.p. & mensinger, a.f. 2012. seasonal abundance and movement of the invasive round goby (neogobius melanostomus) on rocky substrate in the duluth-superior harbor of lake superior. ecology of freshwater fish 21: 64–74. lynch, m. & mensinger, a. 2013. temporal patterns in growth and survival of the round goby neogobius melanos- tomus. journal of fish biology 82: 111–124. macinnis, a.j. & corkum, l.d. 2000. fecundity and repro- ductive season of the round goby neogobius melanostomus in the upper detroit river. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 136–144. ray, w.j. & corkum, l.d. 2001. habitat and site affinity of the round goby. journal of great lakes research 27: 329– 334. riley, s., roseman, e., nichols, s., o’brien, t., kiley, c. & schaeffer, j. 2008. deepwater demersal fish community col- lapse in lake huron. transactions of the american fisheries society 137: 1879–1890. young, j.a.m., marentette, j.r., gross, c., mcdonald, j.i., verma, a., marsh-rollo, s.e., macdonald, p.d.m., earn, d.j.d. & balshine, s. 2010. demography and substrate affinity of the round goby (neogobius melanostomus) in hamilton harbour. journal of great lakes research 36: 115–122. 41  