ecology of freshwater fish 2014: 23: 347–359 ó 2013 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish using occupancy and species distribution models to assess the conservation status and habitat use of the goldline darter (percina aurolineata) in georgia, usa brett albanese1, thomas litts2, mieko camp3, deborah a. weiler1 1georgia department of natural resources, nongame conservation section, 2065 us hwy 278 se, social circle, ga 30025, usa 2georgia department of natural resources, fisheries management section, 2065 us hwy 278, se, social circle, ga 30025, usa 3tennessee tech university, cooperative fish and wildlife research unit, po box 5114, cookeville, tn 38505, usa accepted for publication june 18, 2013 abstract – the goldline darter (percina aurolineata) is threatened by recent increases in urbanisation in the coosawattee river watershed, but no studies have addressed their current status. similarly, limited data on habitat use make it difficult to understand factors that may impact this species. we compared occurrence data before (1996–2000) and after (2009–2011) a period of rapid development and population growth within the watershed. single-season occupancy models were built to account for imperfect species detection and to identify habitat covariates. maxent was used to identify important stream reaches for conservation and to understand landscape scale factors correlated with the distribution of goldline darters. our results indicate a high proportion of sites occupied upstream of carters lake during the historic and recent time periods, with no evidence of decline. however, occurrences of goldline darters for sites in talking rock creek and the lower coosawattee river were sparse in the historic period and absent during the recent period. the probability of detecting goldline darters is low and was positively associated with the occurrence of small substrate. species distribution models were strongly influenced by watershed area and elevation and indicated a high probability of suitable habitat within the coosawattee river and large tributaries upstream of carters lake. while goldline darter occupancy is currently stable upstream of carters lake, continued urbanisation is a threat to long-term persistence. we recommend additional monitoring and describe a protocol that allows for precise estimates of species occupancy while minimising the risk of sampling-related mortality. key words: maxent; coosawattee; species detection; monitoring; stream fishes introduction the goldline darter (percina aurolineata) was first collected from the cahaba river, alabama, in 1957 and was formally described from the cahaba and coosawattee river (georgia) systems by sut- tkus & ramsey (1967). due to its small and dis- junct distribution, water quality degradation and population loss and fragmentation associated with the goldline darter was reservoir listed as the u.s. endangered species act (united states fish & wildlife service construction, threatened under 1992). no critical habitat has been designated, but goldline darters are included in a recovery plan addressing multiple species in the mobile basin (united states fish & wildlife service 2000). one recovery criterion states that ‘…known populations of the species are shown to be stable or increasing least 5 years…’ (united states for a period of at fish & wildlife service 2000), but the current sta- tus of the species has not been evaluated (freeman 2009). primary threats to populations in georgia are habi- tat loss and population fragmentation associated with correspondence: b. albanese, georgia department of natural resources, nongame conservation section, 2065 us hwy 278 se, social circle, ga 30025-4743, usa. e-mail: brett.albanese@dnr.state.ga.us doi: 10.1111/eff.12085 347 albanese et al. carters lake and water quality impacts associated with poor land use practices (powers & mayden 2002). while sedimentation, nutrient pollution and riparian alteration (e.g., cattle grazing) resulting from forestry and agriculture still impact water quality, development is an emerging threat in the coosawat- tee watershed. gilmer county, which includes almost the entire range of goldline darters in georgia, exhib- ited a 24% increase in population size between 2000 and 2009 (georgia office of planning & budget 2010). this corresponded with a 3.5% increase in ‘built up’ (7.4% of basin), a 2.4% decrease in forest cover (78.6% of basin) and a 1.1% decrease in agricultural land cover (13.0% of basin) between 1999 and 2008 (natural resource spatial analysis lab 2012). while numerous studies have documented fish community changes at low thresh- olds of urbanisation (wang et al. 2001; roy et al. 2005; wenger et al. 2008), the sensitivity of goldline darter populations to this type of land use change remains unknown. land cover there is a clear imperative to assess the current sta- tus of goldline darter populations, but monitoring rare and legally protected fishes presents several chal- lenges. first, it may be difficult to detect species dur- ing surveys, which can result in underestimating the proportion of sites occupied (bayley & peterson 2001; mackenzie et al. 2002). fortunately, there are now methods to adjust occupancy estimates for incomplete species detection and these are being increasingly used in studies of stream fishes (wenger et al. 2008; hagler et al. 2011; anderson et al. 2012). the risk of handling stress and mortality is also a significant issue for monitoring legally pro- tected fishes. visual sampling methods (e.g., ensign et al. 1995; jordan et al. 2008; albanese et al. 2011) minimise this problem, but poor water clarity in streams where goldline darters occur makes electro- fishing a more effective method. given these con- straints, the fundamental challenge for monitoring is to sample enough to account for low species detec- tion but not more than necessary due to the risks associated with sampling. very little is known about habitat use of the gold- line darter (boschung & mayden 2004), which limits our understanding of factors that may affect goldline darter populations and our ability to conserve the spe- cies. qualitative habitat features include moderate to swift currents, depths less than 1 m, rocky substrates, presence of riverweed (podostemum ceratophyllum), large stream width (15–60 m) and riffle and run mesohabitat (suttkus & ramsey 1967; freeman & weyers 1999; powers & mayden 2002; boschung & mayden 2004). no studies have addressed their asso- ciation with landscape scale features (e.g., land cover, elevation), which can help identify important covari- 348 ates of species occurrence and areas to target future surveys (elith et al. 2011). in status we used historic data, occupancy analysis and spe- cies distribution models (maxent) to assess the cur- rent and habitat use of goldline darter populations in georgia. our specific objectives were as follows: (i) to compare the recent and historic sta- tus of goldline darter populations, (ii) to estimate the current proportion of sites occupied using a method that accounts for incomplete species detection and (iii) to identify habitats associated with species occur- rence at small (microhabitat to mesohabitat) and large (stream reach to watershed) spatial scales. in addi- tion, we discuss threats to the persistence of this spe- cies that minimises the amount of sampling required to obtain a precise estimate of species occupancy. a monitoring protocol and describe study site description the coosawattee river system in north-west georgia is part of the coosa drainage and greater mobile river basin (fig. 1). the system begins in the blue ridge physiographic province and flows through a section of the ridge and valley where it joins the conasauga river to form the oostanaula river. cart- ers lake, a 3200 acre impoundment completed in 1974, effectively fragments the system at the junction of the two physiographic provinces. an additional reservoir created by a reregulation dam occurs down- stream of carters lake dam and fragments talking rock creek from the ridge and valley portion of the coosawattee river. the reregulation dam moderates the characteristic impacts of hydropower operations in the lower coosawattee river, with higher tempera- tures, higher oxygen levels and more stable flows than other rivers that are managed for peak power generation (freeman et al. 2011). however, historic alteration for navigation (e.g., bedrock and gravel removal) limits the amount of riffle habitat in the coosawattee river downstream of carters lake (freeman et al. 2011). freeman & weyers (1999) accessed records from regional and national museums to develop a database of historical fish collections in the coosawattee river system. they identified 115 unique sampling sites, 33 of which had records for goldline darters. with the exception of four sites in the lower reaches of tributary streams, all records are from the largest streams in the system: cartecay river, ellijay river, mountaintown creek, talking rock creek and the coosawattee river. we focused on these streams for our status assessment and hereafter refer to sections of the coosawattee river upstream and downstream of carters lake as the ‘upper’ and ‘lower’ coosawat- tee river, respectively. further, we collectively refer goldline darter status and habitat use fig. 1. distribution of sites where goldline darters were (black circles) and were not (empty circles) detected during recent surveys (2009– 2011) in the coosawattee river system. inset shows coosawattee river watershed highlighted among other huc eight watersheds in georgia. to all goldline darter streams upstream (i.e., cartecay river, ellijay river, mountaintown creek and upper coosawattee river) and downstream (i.e., talking rock creek and lower coosawattee river) of carters lake as ‘above’ and ‘below’ carters lake, respec- tively. materials and methods historic survey based upon the availability of data, we compared two time the distribution of goldline darters for periods: historic (1996–2000) and recent (2009– 2011). the historic period predates rapid develop- (model 12b pow; smith-root ment and population growth that occurred in the early to middle 2000s. freeman & weyers (1999) surveyed 23 sites during the historic period as part of a status assessment for goldline darters. nineteen of these sites were sampled with a dc backpack electrofisher inc., vancouver, wa, usa) using a 3.0 m wide 9 1.8 m high seine (3.2-mm mesh) and dipnets (3.2-mm mesh) to capture fishes. the remaining four sites were designated as ‘fixed monitoring sites’ and were sampled annually during the historic period using the seine described above. backpack electrofishing was not used at these sites because of concerns that repeated electrofishing could harm goldline darter populations. sites ranged 50–100 m 349 albanese et al. in length, and an effort to sample all available stream microhabitats was made at each site. we considered any site where goldline darters were detected at least once within the historic period to be occupied by the species. recent survey we adopted a stratified-random sampling design to select sites from each of the major streams with known occurrences of goldline darters upstream of carters lake and from talking rock creek. each stream was divided into one-kilometre reaches that were embedded within three-kilometre strata; one reach was then randomly selected from each stratum. we sampled the first riffle-run habitat unit encoun- tered within each selected reach as we travelled downstream through each stratum by kayak. we focused on riffle-run habitats because of the results of a microhabitat study where 69 goldline darters were observed in riffle-run habitats, but not in pools (freeman & weyers 1999). following the approach used by albanese et al. (2011), sites were sampled using systematic sam- pling with a random start. we first estimated the downstream boundary of the riffle-run unit and then paced 0–9 randomly determined metres upstream to our first sampling transect. transects were perpen- dicular to stream flow and were spaced every 15 m until habitats too deep to sample (ca. >1.2 m) were reached at the upstream end of the site. two to four quadrats were spaced along each transect, with each quadrat separated by at least 2 m of stream width. quadrats extended 10 m upstream from the transect line, which maintained a separation distance of at least 5 m of stream length between quadrats on adjacent transects. at least 12 quadrats were sam- pled at each site, with more quadrats allocated to sites with greater surface area of habitat (max = 16, mean = 12.8). a 3.7 m wide 9 1.8 m high seine (3.2-mm mesh) was held along the transect, forming the downstream boundary of the quadrat. quadrats were sampled using the same model backpack electrofisher as used in the historic survey. cathode and anode electrode rings (28 cm diameter) were bumped along the stream bottom as the quadrat was sampled in an upstream to downstream direction; the total area of quadrat sampled was ca. 30 m2 (10 m length, ca. 3 m width to allow a bag to form in the seine). stunned fishes floated into the seine where they were captured, identified and released. the electric field was localised between the electrodes, and we never observed stunned fishes more than one metre from the quadrat boundary. we sampled fishes at 33 sites during the summers (june–august) of 2009–2011. 350 floated through the quadrat after sampling, we measured dominant substrate, mean depth, mean surface current velocity and river- weed (podostemum ceratophyllum) coverage for each quadrat. depth (cm) and dominant substratum were measured at 1.0-m intervals spaced along the centre of each quadrat, for a total of 10 measurements. sur- face current velocity (msec  1) was measured in each quadrat at least two times by timing a ping-pong ball as it (gordon et al. 1992). depth and current velocity measurements were averaged for each quadrat. dominant substratum was visually classified into the following categories: (2–16 mm), pebble (16–64 mm), silt, sand, gravel cobble (64–256 mm), boulder (>256 mm) and bed- rock (gordon et al. 1992). the modal dominant sub- stratum category was determined for each quadrat, categorised as small (pebble and smaller) or large (cobble and larger) and coded as a one (small) or zero (large) in subsequent analyses. the proportion of the quadrat covered by riverweed was visually estimated and coded as a one (>25%) or zero (0– 25%) in subsequent analyses. habitat sampling was only completed at 28 of the 33 sites sampled for fishes, due to logistical constraints. we used data from a separate study to assess the status of goldline darters in the lower coosawattee river. freeman et al. (2011) sampled 10 riffle-run units in the lower coosawattee river during may– august 2010. three of these sites were sampled by our crew using the approach described above for the recent period, but differed in the number of quadrats sampled due to variation in riffle size (5–19 quadrats, mean = 13.8). the remaining seven sites were sam- pled by a different crew using a similar protocol except that quadrats were smaller (5 m2 area sam- pled) and more numerous (16–66, mean = 41.2) and a smaller seine (2.4 m wide 9 1.8 mm high with 3.2-mm mesh) was used. habitat data comparable to the data collected at sites upstream of carters lake and in talking rock creek were not collected in the lower coosawattee river. occupancy and detection we estimated detection probability and site occu- pancy for goldline darters using the single-season models described by mackenzie et al. (2002). to make sure our sampling was effective at detecting a syntopic congener associated with similar benthic habitats (e.g., riverweed, cobbles, gravel; boschung & mayden 2004), we also built models for the more common bronze darter (percina palmaris) for comparison. site occupancy (w) is the proportion of sites occupied within the overall study area, cor- rected for incomplete detection. detection probabil- ity (p) the probability of detecting a target is species within a single quadrat, given that it is pres- ent within the site. a critical assumption of single- season occupancy models is that sites are closed to changes in occupancy during the entire survey sea- son. our sampling protocol helped satisfy this assumption because all quadrats within a site were sampled on a single day. the model also assumes independence among detections both within and between sites. we attempted to satisfy this assump- tion by allowing sufficient spacing between quadrats within each site and by randomly selecting sample sites. occupancy models can also be biased by false-species detections (shea et al. 2011), but we do not believe this affected our study because gold- line darters are easily identified from sympatric congeners (freeman 2009). we only included sites with complete habitat data in our occupancy analysis. we also excluded sites from talking rock creek for goldline darters because we never collected the species in that system. including sites from talking rock creek would potentially confound relations with covariates if suit- able microhabitat conditions were present but not likely to be occupied due to the rarity or absence of goldline daters. thus, our occupancy analysis for goldline darters was based upon 20 sites located above carters lake. the analysis for bronze darters included these same sites plus additional sites in talking rock creek (27 total sites). occupancy models account for variation in occu- pancy and detection using environmental covariates, which can help improve model fit and detect impor- tant species–habitat relationships. we hypothesised that detection probability would vary with mean depth, current velocity, substrate size (small or large) and riverweed coverage (0–25%, >25%) within each quadrat. none of the covariates on q were strongly correlated with each other (all pearson’s r < 0.20). based upon their occurrence in large creeks and rivers in the study area, we predicted that occu- pancy would area. watershed area (mi 2) upstream of each sample site was measured using arcgis 9.3 (esri inc., redlands, ca, usa). increase with watershed models were analysed using the occupancy-estima- tion procedure in program mark (white & burn- ham 1999). we assessed models with all possible combinations of covariates, including the global (all covariates) and empty (no covariates) models, for a total of 32 models. all covariates were standardised to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one, which permits direct comparison of parameter esti- mates. we used a parametric bootstrap goodness-of- fit test (mackenzie et al. 2006) with 500 iterations to evaluate the relative fit of the global model. the bootstrap goodness-of-fit test indicated lack of fit for goldline darter status and habitat use our global model (c-hat = 1.61, values >1 indicate overdispersion), so models were ranked using the quasi-akaike’s information criterion (qaicc). this approach accounts for overdispersion and small sam- ple size (burnham & anderson 2002; mackenzie et al. 2006). program mark calculates model weights that range from 0 to 1, with the most plausible candidate model having the highest weight (burnham & anderson 2002). we selected models with weights (wi) within 10% of the highest ranked model and included them in a confidence set for further inter- pretation. we compared different models within the confidence set by calculating the ratio of wi values, which summarise the degree of evidence for one model over another (anderson et al. 2000). we cal- culated cumulative detection probabilities or the probability of detecting at least one individual given a sampling effort of (n) quadrats, using the follow- ing equation: 1–(1-p)n. we used estimates of p from models without covariates to determine cumulative detection because they reflect average detection over the range of habitats sampled (albanese et al. 2011). landscape scale analysis we used maxent (phillips et al. 2006) to identify landscape scale factors associated with the presence of goldline darters. maxent software uses species occurrence records and environmental data to esti- mate species distributions. a key advantage is that it uses presence-only data, allowing the use of diverse data sets (e.g., museum records or data from multiple surveys using different methods) that would be diffi- cult to utilise in traditional approaches requiring pres- ence–absence data (phillips et al. 2006). we conducted maxent modelling in two phases. in the first phase (physical model), we built a com- prehensive model relating environmental factors (ele- vation, watershed area and stream slope) to goldline darter occurrences. because these predictor variables are static, we used all known goldline darter occur- rences regardless of date. in addition to our own sur- vey data, we obtained records from the georgia museum of natural history and the georgia natural heritage program databases. collectively, our data set for the physical model contained 48 unique loca- tions where goldline darters were captured between 1965 and 2012. in the second phase (land cover model), we included important variables from the physical model along with contemporary land cover data from 2005. because we wanted to examine the influence of land cover on the current distribution of goldline darters, we only used 32 goldline darter occurrences documented between 2004 and 2012 for the land cover model. 351 albanese et al. models were built using maxent version 3.3.3k (schapire 2011) with program defaults. maxent allows for a percentage of randomly selected observa- tions to be held out from the model training data set and used for an independent test of model accuracy; we held out 25% of occurrences in the physical model but did not hold out any observations from the land cover model due to small sample size. we used the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves produced by maxent to assess model performance on both training and test data (phillips 2011). a model with good fit will have a high area under the roc curve, indicating a model that would classify suitable habitat at a high proportion of reaches with actual occurrences (i.e., high sensitivity) while minimising the fraction of the study area classified as having suitable habitat (i.e., high specificity or low false- positive rate). we selected logistic output for plots, which gives the model-estimated probability of suit- able habitat for each stream reach in the study area. individual variable importance was assessed by the per cent contribution of each variable to gain in model fit, along with the jackknife procedure imple- mented in maxent. the jackknife procedure assesses how gains in model fit change as individual variables are included or held out of the data set. maxent also produces response curves that plot predicted values against individual variables. maxent model inputs were derived from the national hydrography dataset plus (flow accumula- tion, flow direction, digital elevation model and catchment data sets; united states geological survey 2007) and the 2005 georgia land use trends data set (natural resource spatial analysis lab 2012). source projections and resolution (30 9 30 m cell size) were maintained throughout. data processing table 1. number of sites surveyed and number of sites where goldline darters were detected (proportion) during historic and recent sampling periods in large streams of the coosawattee river system, georgia. aggregate results are also presented for all waterbodies (total), for talking rock creek and the lower coosawattee river (below carters lake) and for all waterbodies upstream of carters lake (above carters lake) historic surveys (1996–2000) recent surveys (2009–2011) waterbody surveyed detected surveyed detected cartecay river upper coosawattee river lower coosawattee river ellijay river mountaintown creek talking rock creek total below carters lake above carters lake 6 1 7 3 3 3 23 10 13 5 (0.83) 1 (1.00) 1 (0.14) 3 (1.00) 1 (0.33) 1 (0.33) 12 (0.52) 2 (0.20) 10 (0.77) 10 6 10 6 4 7 43 17 26 8 (0.80) 6 (1.00) 0 (0.00) 4 (0.67) 4 (1.00) 0 (0.00) 22 (0.51) 0 (0.00) 22 (0.85) 352 was performed using the spatial analyst extension in arcgis version 10 with data in the esri grid format. land cover classes representing agriculture, urban and forested land were aggregated as per cent of total area at the catchment level. physical inputs represent- ing watershed area (square metres), slope (per cent) and elevation (centimetres) were derived at the pixel level. all model inputs were constructed such that river network pixels had values and background pixels (i.e., over land) had no data. results historic survey goldline darters were detected at 12 of the 23 sites (0.52) sampled during the historic period (table 1). there was a higher proportion of occupied sites above carters lake (0.77) than below (0.20). the number of fish captured by electrofishing averaged 1.4 for all sites, 2.3 for sites above carters lake and 0.30 for sites below carters lake. recent survey goldline darters were detected at a similar proportion of sites sampled in the recent period (0.51; table 1; fig. 1), and sites above carters lake again exhibited a high rate of occupancy (0.85). however, goldline darters were not detected below carters lake. the number of goldline darters captured per site was 1.6 overall and 2.5 for sites above carters lake. on aver- age, we captured 0.19 goldline darters per quadrat above carters lake. occupancy and detection during one sampling quadrat was the estimated probability of detecting a goldline dar- ter 0.20 (se = 0.03), with a 95% ci of 0.15–0.27. the proba- bility of detecting a bronze darter during one sam- pling quadrat was 0.61 (se = 0.03), with a 95% ci of 0.55–0.66. the cumulative probability of detecting a bronze darter exceeds 90% after only three quad- rats, but the same threshold is not reached for gold- line darters until at least 11 quadrats are sampled (fig. 2). the estimated w for goldline darters was 0.91 (se = 0.09) with a 95% ci of 0.53–0.99. the estimated w for bronze darters was 0.96 (se = 0.04) with a 95% ci of 0.78–0.99. all estimates are from models without covariates and reflect average detec- tion and occupancy over the range of habitats we sur- veyed. six occupancy models were retained in the confi- dence set (table 2). the top model included small ) ρ ( y t i l i b a b o r p  n o i t c e t e d e v i t a l u m u c 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 goldline darter status and habitat use goldline darter bronze darter 8 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 9 7 number of quadrats sampled fig. 2. cumulative probability of detection (q) as a function of the number of quadrats sampled within a site for goldline and bronze dart- ers. the vertical line represents the mean number of quadrats sampled in this study. table 2. model structure, weights and number of parameters for the six occupancy models within the confidence set; an additional 26 models were also built but are not shown because of low model weights. models are ranked by quasi-aicc (qaicc), which is corrected for small sample size and accounts for overdispersion of the data. watershed area (wa) was a covariate on occupancy (w). mean depth and surface current velocity, riverweed coverage (weed) and dominant substrate size (small) were covariates of q (detection) and were measured within each sampling quadrat model qaicc weight number of parameters w(.) p (small) w(.) p (small, weed) w(.) p (small, velocity) w(.) p (depth, small) w(wa) p (small) w(.) p (.) 141.5 143.2 143.9 144.6 144.7 146.0 0.366 0.155 0.113 0.077 0.075 0.038 3 4 4 4 4 2 table 3. parameter estimates, standard errors (se) and 95% confidence intervals (ci) for predictor variables in occupancy models. parameter estimates are from the highest ranked model within the confidence set that contained the variable listed 95% ci of estimate parameter estimate (se) w (watershed area) q (depth) q (small) q (velocity) q (weed) 0.06 (1.16) 0.05 (0.18) 0.53 (0.15) 0.20 (0.18) 0.29 (0.19) lower  2.21  0.30 0.23  0.14  0.09 upper 2.32 0.40 0.82 0.55 0.67 substrate as a covariate of q and was 2.4–9.6 times more likely than the remaining models. four addi- tional models also included small substrate as a covariate of q, but all other covariates never appeared in more than one model. the parameter estimate the probability of detecting goldline indicates that darters is higher in quadrats dominated by small substrates (table 3). this pattern reflects over-repre- sentation in quadrats dominated by gravel and pebble substrata and under-representation in quadrats domi- nated by boulders (fig. 3). parameter estimates for remaining covariates indicated weak to nonexistent relationships, with confidence intervals overlapping zero (table 3). landscape scale analysis the physical maxent species distribution model shows a high probability of suitable habitat within currently occupied reaches of the cartecay river, elli- jay river and mountaintown creek, with higher prob- abilities in the downstream reaches of these tributaries (fig. 4). the highest probabilities of suitable habitat in the study area (up to 0.78) occur within the reach of the coosawattee river between its origin (ellijay and cartecay confluence) and its confluence with mountaintown creek. the probability of suitable hab- itat decreases below mountaintown creek but still remains high for some reaches occurring within the area that is now impounded by carters lake. almost all of talking rock creek exhibited relatively low probabilities of suitable habitat (<36%). similarly, the probability of suitable habitat within the lower coosa- wattee river was low (<18%). performance within model and on test data was high, with the area under the roc curve = 0.98 in both cases. 353 albanese et al. s t a r d a u q  f o n o i t r o p o r p 0.50 0.45 0.40 0.35 0.30 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 0.00 “small” “large” available detected silt sand gravel pebble cobble boulder bedrock modal dominant substrate category fig. 3. proportion of goldline darter detections (black) and proportion of quadrats available (white) by modal dominant substrate category. lines labelled small and large denote the categories of substrate sizes that were combined for the occupancy analysis. watershed area had the largest per cent contribu- tion to model gain (82.8) followed by elevation (15.6) and slope (1.6). jackknife tests produced simi- lar results, with watershed area providing the largest gain when included separately in the model and the largest decrease in gain when omitted from the model. the response curve for watershed area shows a low probability of suitable habitat below 200 km2, a peak at 600 km2 and a rapid decline in watersheds >600 km2. sites above carters lake (83–632 km2) and within talking rock creek (140–357 km2) mostly fell within the range of watershed areas with a high probability of suitable habitat, but sites within (1344– the 2200 km2). the probability of suitable habitat peaks around 400 m elevation and rapidly declines for both lower and higher elevations. sites above carters lake fell within a narrow range of elevations where the probability of suitable habitat was high (348–476 m), but talking rock creek (238–317 m) and lower co- osawattee river elevations (189–217 m) were much lower. slope had such a small influence on the model that we did not consider it further. lower coosawattee river did not the distribution of suitable habitat from the land cover model was qualitatively similar to results of the physical model. within-model performance was high, with an area under the roc curve = 0.99. watershed area again had the largest contribution to model gain (79.6%) followed by elevation (17.6%), per cent urban (2.3%), per cent forest (0.3%) and per cent agriculture (0.1%). the jackknife procedure provides the same ranking of variable importance and shows that model gain does not decline when each land cover variable is omitted from the model. the shape of the response curves for watershed area and eleva- 354 tion are unchanged from the physical model. the land cover variables contributed so little to the model that we do not consider them further. discussion our study was successful at documenting the current status and habitat use of goldline darters in georgia. here, we interpret our results and discuss implica- tions for conserving goldline darters above and below carters lake. we also illustrate how to incorporate results from occupancy and species distribution mod- elling into a long-term monitoring programme for rare stream fishes. status above carters lake we detected goldline darters at a high proportion of sites upstream of carters lake (0.85), with occu- pancy models estimating an even higher occupancy rate (0.91) after accounting for imperfect species detection. similarly, our species distribution models indicate a high probability of suitable habitat within the mainstem coosawattee river and large tributaries upstream of carters lake. the spatial clustering of occurrences and the high probability of suitable habi- tat within unsampled reaches suggests that this area may represent one large population connected by movement and gene flow. if true, the demographics of tributary populations might not be independent from the mainstem river (osborne & wiley 1992; hitt & roberts 2012), which has important implica- tions for conservation (schlosser & angermeier 1995). for example, habitat degradation in the main- stem could potentially diminish demographic support goldline darter status and habitat use fig. 4. probability of suitable habitat for goldline darters from the maxent physical model. the model is based upon 48 occurrence loca- tions of goldline darters collected between 1965 and 2012 (black circles). physical inputs to the model included watershed area, channel slope and elevation. for tributaries (or vice versa). similarly, goldline dart- ers may be more sensitive to isolation (e.g., perched culverts, dams) than species comprised of demo- graphically independent populations. until more data on movement and dispersal are available, the most prudent conservation strategy is to protect habitat quality and connectivity throughout this entire area. the despite recent increases in urbanisation, we found no evidence that the proportion of sites occupied by goldline darters has declined between historic and recent sampling periods. similarly, land cover vari- ables had a negligible influence on our species distri- bution models, current distribution of goldline darters does not reflect cur- rent land use patterns. however, current stability in occupancy and distribution does not mean that gold- suggesting that if line darter populations are invulnerable to future change. additional development is expected to occur as georgia’s population grows from 10 to 15 million people by 2030 (edwards et al. 2013). future development follows the existing pattern of vacation homes along scenic rivers and commercial develop- ment near ellijay, it is likely to impact water quality, hydrology and biota in the best remaining habitat for goldline darters in georgia. such impacts have been well documented in other urbanising watersheds, but do not become apparent until some unknown but typ- ically low threshold of development is exceeded (paul & meyer 2001; wenger et al. 2008). there are many conservation activities that can help increase the resilience of goldline darter populations to future change. some of the headwater streams and 355 albanese et al. mainstem reaches are already protected by public con- servation areas (e.g., rich mountain wildlife manage- ment area), and additional land acquisition would protect remaining forested tracts from development. conservation activities on private lands could include conservation easements, reforestation of riparian zones, landowner education on buffer management, cattle exclusion and practices to minimise the impact of new development (etowah habitat conservation plan advi- sory committee 2007; owers et al. 2012). the region’s water plan outlines alternatives to reservoir construction including water conservation, increased storage within existing reservoirs and reuse of highly treated wastewater (coosa north georgia water plan- ning council 2011). successful implementation of all of the measures described above would help meet the criteria required for recovery of the goldline darter (united states fish & wildlife service 2000). populations below carters lake we never collected goldline darters in the lower coosawattee river or in talking rock creek, suggesting extreme rarity or possible extirpation from this portion of their range. here, we discuss evidence for three hypotheses that may explain this pattern: (i) our results reflect low detection probability and gold- line darters are more common than indicated by survey data, (ii) habitat differences between sites above and below carters lake account for the his- toric and current rarity of the species below carters lake and (iii) goldline darters were more common below carters lake historically, but populations have been impacted by river alteration. given the large number of sites sampled and high detection probabilities for our sampling method, the pattern documented in talking rock creek likely reflects true rarity and not a sampling artefact. to fur- ther evaluate hypothesis 1, we used our occupancy models to predict q for all quadrats sampled in talk- ing rock creek. estimates ranged 0.19–0.20 across our top five models and were almost identical to the estimate for quadrats above carters lake (0.20). we expect detection to be lower in the lower coosawat- tee river because of the prevalence of deeper and swifter habitats and the narrow window of stream flows that permit sampling in riffle-run units. how- ever, nine darter species were detected during our surveys, including several protected species that are likely rare (e.g., amber darter percina antesella, freckled darter percina lenticula). while we cannot rule out the possible occurrence of goldline darters in the lower coosawattee river, it is unlikely that they are common. landscape scale habitat differences are a plausible explanation for the absence or rarity of goldline dart- 356 ers below carters lake (hypothesis 2). our species distribution model indicated a lower probability of suitable habitat in talking rock creek and the lower coosawattee river compared with reaches above carters lake. model results were driven primarily by lower elevations in talking rock creek and the lower coosawattee river and by larger watershed area in the lower coosawattee river. the paucity of historic records is also consistent with the idea that the lower coosawattee river and talking rock creek never supported large populations. our compiled database includes three collection records of goldline darters in talking rock creek that span 1983–2007, with each collection only containing a single individual. there is a single record of one goldline darter from the lower coosawattee river in 1998, captured just below the reregulation dam (fig. 4). our database includes eight surveys carried out in talking rock creek prior to completion of the reregulation dam, but goldline darters were not captured. unfortunately, we are not aware of any pre-impoundment survey data for the lower coosawattee river. it is also possible that the current rarity or absence of goldline darters below carters lake reflects river alteration (hypothesis 3). goldline darters may have been more abundant before fragmentation and flow alteration by the two upstream dams or perhaps prior to historic channel alterations for barge traffic in late 1800s (freeman et al. 2011). our maxent model illustrates that at least a portion of the coosawattee river now impounded by carters lake likely pro- vided suitable habitat for goldline darters. suttkus & ramsey (1967) suggested that goldline darters may have once been distributed throughout the alabama river system (i.e., between coosawattee and cahaba populations), but were probably extirpated by ‘…pol- lution and extensive impoundment’. if true, our max- ent models are biased by the lack of historic data in the lower coosawattee river (see elith et al. 2011 for a discussion of this bias) and do not portray the full range of elevation and watershed areas that are suitable to goldline darters. even if the lower coosa- wattee river did not support a large population of goldline darters, it may have been important as a dis- persal corridor between the upper coosawattee river and talking rock creek. thus, isolation may have contributed to the rarity of goldline darters in talking rock creek and the apparent extirpation of the blue shiner (cyprinella caerulea), which was last docu- mented in this system in 1965. it difficult lack of historic survey data in the lower coosa- wattee river makes to discriminate between hypotheses two and three, and we suggest that both habitat and historic river alteration contrib- ute to the rarity or possible absence of goldline dart- ers below carters lake. expanding the maxent analysis to include the entire potential range of gold- line darters (i.e., cahaba, coosawattee and all reaches between) will help better define the full range of hab- itats suitable for goldline darters and clarify the sig- nificance of habitats below carters lake. habitat use our occupancy models indicated a positive relation- ship between detection of goldline darters and small substrate (gravel and pebbles). similarly, stiles & ramsey (1986) report spawning over sand and fine gravel during spring. persistence of goldline darters in pebble and gravel habitats throughout the summer (i.e., postspawning) suggests that these habitats may also be important for foraging. the lack of relation- ships with other habitat covariates suggests that gold- line darters are likely to be detected across a range of depths, velocities and riverweed coverages occurring within riffle-run habitats. at the landscape scale, species distribution models were strongly influenced by watershed area and ele- vation. our occupancy models did not support a rela- tionship with watershed area, but this is an artefact of our sampling within watershed areas that were suit- able to goldline darters. watershed area is often cor- related with many factors that change along the river continuum, such as depth, width, flow stability and temperature (allen 1995), making it difficult to infer causal mechanisms. the correlation between fish dis- tributions and elevation is often attributed to an underlying relationship with water temperature (kele- her & rahel 1996; quist et al. 2004). explicitly incorporating stream temperature into future maxent modelling may help better define goldline darter hab- itat requirements and also help predict its vulnerabil- ity to climate change (eaton & scheller 1996). applications to future monitoring our initial estimates of occupancy and detection can help optimise a monitoring plan for goldline darters. based upon simulation modelling, mackenzie & royle (2005) developed a table yielding the optimum number of surveys per site (k) for different combina- tions of occupancy and detection; optimum refers to a design that minimises variance in the occupancy estimate by balancing the trade-off between sampling intensively at a few sites or less intensively at many sites. using our estimated values of p and w in their table indicates that the optimum number of surveys (quadrats) to sample is 16. similarly, using our estimated values of p, w, k and equation 6.3 in mackenzie et al. (2006), the number of sites needed to achieve a desired level of precision can be esti- mated. for example, 48 sites need to be sampled to goldline darter status and habitat use achieve a desired level of precision of 5%. similar calculations have been completed for other rare dart- ers, including conasauga logperch (percina jenkinsi), olive darter (percina squamata) and wounded darter (etheostoma vulneratum) and have indicated much higher sample size requirements for the same level of precision (albanese et al. 2011; hagler et al. 2011). sampling 16 quadrats at 48 sites (768 total quad- rats) is logistically feasible for a full-time sampling crew working throughout the summer. however, it may be possible to reduce the amount of required sampling while still obtaining a precise estimate of occupancy. this is important given the cost of sam- pling and the risk of mortality associated with elec- trofishing (e.g., bohl et al. 2009). one alternative would be to halt sampling (mackenzie et al. 2006) when goldline darters are detected at a site and then move onto the next site; 16 quadrats would only be sampled if goldline darters are not detected on quad- rats 1–15. based upon 500 simulations in program presence 4.0 (hines 2006), sampling all 16 quadrats at 48 sites yields a mean se of w of 0.049. in comparison, halting after the first detection yields a mean se of w of 0.053. we consider this minor increase in se to be acceptable given the significant benefits of sampling fewer quadrats. to our protocol we also recommend two additional methodological adjustments that may improve detection probability and efficiency. first, an addi- tional crew member walking next to the backpack electrofisher could increase detection by dipnetting goldline darters that might otherwise drift out of the quadrat or become lodged in complex substrates before floating into the seine. second, shortening the length of the quadrat to five metres should allow sampling of more quadrats without compromising species detection. while more goldline darters can potentially be captured when larger areas are sam- pled, the quadrat often elude capture. we implemented this protocol (dipnetter and 5-m-long quadrats) in the cahaba river system, alabama, in summer 2012 and captured a mean of 0.39 goldline darters per quadrat. while this may reflect unknown differences in popu- lation size between the two areas, the relatively high catch per unit effort in the cahaba (0.39 vs. 0.19) indicates that this new protocol is very effective. the upstream end of fish stunned near future monitoring should focus on the area of high habitat suitability identified by our maxent physical model. this would include all 26 of the sites we sam- pled upstream of carters lake during our survey. the additional sites needed for a precise estimate of occupancy should focus on areas that were poorly represented in our survey (e.g., lower mountaintown creek, the coosawattee river between mountaintown creek and carters lake and the upper cartecay 357 albanese et al. river). we recommend a monitoring interval of once every 5 years for consistency with the recovery plan and because of the potential for land cover patterns to change rapidly in this watershed. our study was successful at documenting stable occupancy rates of goldline darter populations above carters lake, despite recent increases in urbanisation. we also documented disproportionate use of habitat patches dominated by small substrate sizes and land- scape scale associations with elevation and watershed area. our joint use of occupancy analysis and max- ent modelling strengthened our inferences about pop- ulation status and factors affecting the distribution of this rare darter. for example, our combined analysis suggests that detection probability was sufficient in talking rock creek (occupancy analysis), but the probability of suitable habitat was relatively low (maxent). similarly, our maxent models helped identify reaches to target for future monitoring and conservation efforts. we recommend extension of our approach to the cahaba river population of goldline darters. acknowledgements we thank m. bowen, h. chandler, j. damer, a. hammond, r. holcolmb, j. emmel, j. hakala, r. harrel, m. hill, p. marcinek, k. owers, k. owens, b. strickland and a. tuck for assistance with sampling. c. straight provided historic fish collection data from the georgia museum of natural history. m. freeman, b. freeman and m. hagler provided data from the lower coosawattee river survey and provided helpful comments on the draft manuscript. j. peterson carried out the bootstrap goodness-of-fit test. this project was funded by a state wildlife grant from the u.s. fish and wildlife service and the georgia wildlife conservation fund. references albanese, b., owers, k.a., weiler, d.w. & pruitt, w. 2011. estimating occupancy of rare fishes using visual surveys, with a comparison to backpack electrofishing. southeastern naturalist 10: 423–442. allen, j.d. 1995. stream ecology: structure and function of running waters. the netherlands: kluwer academic press. 388 pp. anderson, d.r., burnham, k.p. & thompson, w.l. 2000. model hypothesis and testing: problems, prevalence, and an alternative. journal of wildlife management 64: 912–923. anderson, g.b., freeman, m.c., hagler, m.m. & freeman, b.j. 2012. occupancy modelingand estimation of the holi- day darter species complex within the etowah river system. transactions of the american fisheries society 141: 34–45. bayley, p.b. & peterson, j.t. 2001. an approach to estimate probability of presence and richness of fish species. transac- tions of the american fisheries society 130: 620–633. bohl, r.j., henry, t.b., strange, r.j. & rakes, p.l. 2009. effects of electroshock on cyprinid embryos: implications 358 for threatened and endangered fishes. transactions of the american fisheries society 138: 768–776. boschung, h.t. & mayden, r.l. 2004. fishes of alabama. washington, dc: smithsonian books, 736 pp. burnham, k.p. & anderson, d.r. 2002. model selection and information-theoretic multimodel approach. new york: springer-verlag, 488 pp. a practical inference: coosa north georgia water planning council. 2011. coosa- north georgia’s water development and conservation plan. atlanta, ga: georgia department of natural resources. available http://www.coosanorthgeorgia.org/. accessed 29 october, 2012. online at: eaton, j.g. & scheller, r.m. 1996. effects of climate warm- ing on fish thermal habitat in streams of the united states. limnology and oceanography 41: 1109–1115. edwards, l., ambrose, j. & kirkman, l.k. 2013. the natural communities of georgia. athens, georgia: the university of georgia press. 675 pp. elith, j., phillips, s.j., hastie, t., dudõk, m., chee, y.e. & yates, c.j. 2011. a statistical explanation of maxent for ecologists. diversity and distributions 17: 43–57. ensign, w.e., angermeier, p.l. & dolloff, c.a. 1995. use of line-transect methods to estimate abundance of benthic stream fishes. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 52: 213–222. etowah habitat conservation plan advisory committee. 2007. draft etowah aquatic habitat conservation plan. athens, ga: university of georgia river basin center. available online at: http://www.etowahhcp.org. accessed 3 december, 2012. freeman, b.j. 2009. goldline darter account. georgia rare species profile page. social circle, ga: georgia department of natural resources. available online at: http://www.geor- giawildlife.org/node/2623. accessed 19 june, 2012. freeman, b.j. & weyers, h.s. 1999. life history and status of the goldline darter percina aurolineata in the coosawattee river system of northern georgia. athens, ga: united states fish and wildlife service, 82 pp. freeman, m.c., hagler, m.m., albanese, b. & freeman, b.j. 2011. inventory of small-bodied fishes and their habitat below two united states army corps of engineers hydro- power facilities in the upper coosa watershed. savannah, ga: u.s. army corps of engineers, 38 pp. georgia office of planning and budget 2010. county popula- tion change 2000-2009. available online at: http://opb.geor gia.gov/census-data. accessed 16 june, 2010. gordon, n.d., mcmahon, t.a. & finlayson, b.l. 1992. stream hydrology: an introductionfor ecologists. chichester, uk: john wiley and sons. 526 pp. hagler, m.m., freeman, m.c., wenger, s.j., freeman, b.j., rakes, p.l. & shute, j.r. 2011. use of recent and historical records to estimate status and trends of a rare and imperiled stream fish, percina jenkinsi (percidae). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 68: 739–748. hines, j.e. 2006. presence4-software to estimate patch occupancy and related parameters. usgs-pwrc. available online at: http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/software/presence. shtml. accessed 29 october 2012. hitt, n.p. & roberts, j.h. 2012. hierarchical spatial structure of stream fish colonization and extinction. oikos 121: 127– 137. jordan, f., jelks, h.l., bortone, s.a. & dorazio, r.m. 2008. comparison of visual survey and seining methods for esti- mating abundance of an endangered, benthic stream fish. environmental biology of fishes 81: 313–319. keleher, c.j. & rahel, f.j. 1996. thermal limits to salmonid distributions in the rocky mountain region and potential hab- itat loss due to global warming: a geographic information system (gis) approach. transactions of the american fish- eries society 125: 1–13. mackenzie, d.i. & royle, j.a. 2005. designing occupancy studies: general advice and allocating survey effort. journal of applied ecology 42: 1105–1114. mackenzie, d.i., nichols, j.d., lachman, g.b., droege, s., royle, j.a. & langtimm, c.a. 2002. estimating site occu- pancy rates when detection probabilities are less than one. ecology 83: 2248–2255. mackenzie, d.i., nichols, j.d., royle, j.a., pollock, k.h., bailey, l.l. & hines, j.e. 2006. occupancy estimation and modeling: inferring patterns and dynamics of species occur- rence. new york: elsevier, inc., 324 pp. natural resource spatial analysis lab. 2012. georgia landuse trends data. available online at: http://narsal.uga.edu/glut. accessed 23 october, 2012. osborne, l.l. & wiley, m.j. 1992. influence of tributary spa- tial position on the structure of warmwater fish communities. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 49: 671–681. owers, k.a., albanese, b. & litts, t. 2012. using aerial pho- tography to estimate riparian zone impacts in a rapidly developing river corridor. environmental management 49: 543–552. paul, m.j. & meyer, j.l. 2001. streams in the urban landscape. annual review of ecology and systematics 32: 333–365. phillips, s.j. 2011. a brief tutorial on maxent. available http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~schapire/maxent/. at: online accessed 2 september, 2012. phillips, s.j., anderson, r.p. & schapire, r.e. 2006. maxi- mum entropy modeling of species geographic distributions. ecological modelling 190: 231–259. powers, s.l. & mayden, r.l. 2002. threatened fishes of the world: percina aurolineata suttkus & ramsey, 1967 (perci- dae). environmental biology of fishes 63: 116. quist, m.c., hubert, w.a. & rahel, f.j. 2004. elevation and stream size thresholds affect distributions of native and exo- tic warmwater fishes in wyoming. journal of freshwater ecology 19: 227–236. roy, a.h., freeman, m.c., freeman, b.j., wenger, s.j., ensign, w.e. & meyer, j.l. 2005. investigating hydrologic alteration as a mechanism of fish assemblage shifts in urban- goldline darter status and habitat use izing streams. journal of north american benthological society 24: 656–678. schapire, r.e. 2011. maxent software for species habitat mod- eling. available at: http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~schapire/ maxent/. accessed 5 november 2012. schlosser, i.j. & angermeier, p.l. 1995. spatial variation in demographic processes of lotic fishes: conceptual models, empirical evidence, and implications for conservation. in: nielsen, j.l., ed. evolution and the aquatic ecosystem: defin- ing unique units in population conservation. bethesda, mary- land: american fisheries society symposium 17: 392–401. shea, c.p., peterson, j.t., wisniewski, j.m. & johnson, n.a. 2011. misidentification of species (bivalvia: unionidae): contributing factors, management implications, and potential solutions. journal of the north american benthological society 30: 446–458. freshwater mussel stiles, r.a. & ramsey, j.s. 1986. goldline darter, percina aurolineata. in: mount, r.h., ed. vertebrate animals of ala- bama in need of special attention. alabama agricultural experimental station: auburn, al, pp 8–9. suttkus, r.d. & ramsey, j.s. 1967. percina aurolineata, a new percid fish from the alabama river system and a discussion of ecology, distribution, and hybridization of darters of the subgenus hadropterus. tulane studies in zoology 13: 129–145. united states fish and wildlife service. 1992. endangered and threatened wildlife and plants; threatened status for two fish, the goldline darter (percina aurolineata) and the blue shiner (cyprinella caerulea) 50 cfr part 17. federal regis- ter 57: 14786–14790. available online at: www.fws.gov/ endangered. accessed 4 november, 2012. united states fish and wildlife service 2000. recovery plan for mobile river basin aquatic ecosystem. atlanta, ga: uni- ted state fish and wildlife service, 128 pp. united states geological survey. 2007. national hydrography dataset. available at: http://nhd.usgs.gov/data.html. accessed 6 september 2012. wang, l.z., lyons, j. & kanehl, p. 2001. impacts of urbani- zation on stream habitat and fish across multiple spatial scales. environmental management 28: 255–266. wenger, s.j., peterson, j.t., freeman, m.c., freeman, b.j. & homans, d.d. 2008. stream fish occurrence in response to impervious cover, historic land use, and hydrogeomorphic factors. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 65: 125–1264. white, g.c. & burnham, d.c. 1999. program mark: sur- vival estimation from populations of marked animals. bird study 46(suppl.): s120–s139. 359  