http://www.ecologyoffreshwaterﬁ sh.com v o l u m e 2 5 • i s s u e 1 • j a n u a r y 2 0 1 6 ecology of freshwater fish asbjørn vøllestad oslo, norway david c. heins new orleans, usa editors javier lobón-cerviá madrid, spain s p o n s o r e d b y c o n s e j o s u p e r i o r d e i n v e s t i g a c i o n e s c i e n t i f i c a s ( c s i c ) , s p a i n ecology of freshwater fish view this journal online at wileyonlinelibrary.com editors javier lobón-cerviá department of evolutionary ecology national museum of natural sciences c.s.i.c/. jose´ gutie´rrez abascal, 2 e-28006 madrid spain founding editor erik mortensen editorial board editorial board member emeritus robert j. wootton aberystwyth, uk david c. heins department of ecology and evolutionary biology 400 lindy boggs center tulane university new orleans, la 70118 usa carol e. johnston auburn, al, usa bror jonsson oslo, norway edie marsh-matthews norman, ok, usa cynthia paszkowski edmonton, ab, canada thomas p. quinn seattle, wa, usa robert g. randall burlington, on, canada neil h. ringler syracuse, ny, usa hiroshi ueda hokkaido, japan kyle a. young aberystwyth, uk asbjørn vøllestad center for ecological and evolutionary synthesis cees department of biology university of oslo post office box 1066 blindern no-0316 oslo norway john a. baker worcester, ma, usa michael j. blum new orleans, la, usa phaedra budy logan, ut, usa stephanie m. carlson berkeley, ca, usa benigno elvira madrid, spain gordon j. glova christchurch, new zealand gary d. grossman athens, ga, usa kerstin holmgren drottningholm, sweden bernard hugueny paris, france lene jacobsen silkeborg, denmark aims and scope the journal publishes original articles on all aspects of fish ecology and fishery sciences in lakes, rivers and estuaries, including ecologically oriented studies of behaviour, genetics and physiology and the conservation, development and management of recreational and commercial fisheries. reports of studies examining ecological questions in an evolutionary framework are published as well, including research papers addressing evolutionary ecology, behavioral ecology, population ecology, and population biology. papers dealing with the life stages of anadromous and catadromous species in estuaries and inshore coastal zones are also published if they contribute to the general understanding of fish ecology. theoretical papers and studies of impact assessment and modelling are published if they generate testable hypotheses about real systems (fish communities, populations and/or species) or if published data are re-analysed to produce novel conclusions or syntheses. articles, letters and reviews are published based on their scientific content. occasionally, the proceedings of conferences and symposia are published if they are relevant and timely. ecology of freshwater fish accepts articles for open access publication. please visit http://olabout.wiley. com/ wileycda/section/id-406241.html for further information about onlineopen. copyright and copying copyright © 2016 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd. all rights reserved. no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form or by any means without the prior permission in writing from the copyright holder. authorization to copy items for internal and personal use is granted by the copyright holder for libraries and other users registered with their local reproduction rights organisation (rro), e.g. copyright clearance center (ccc), 222 rosewood drive, danvers, ma 01923, usa (www.copyright.com), provided the appropriate fee is paid directly to the rro. this consent does not extend to other kinds of copying, such as copying for general distribution for advertising or promotional purposes, for creating new collective works or for resale. special requests should be addressed to: permissions@wiley.com. disclaimer the publisher and editors cannot be held responsible for errors or any consequences arising from the use of information contained in this journal; the views and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the publisher and editors, neither does the publication of advertisements constitute any endorsement by the publisher and editors of the products advertised. issn 0906-6691 (print) issn 1600-0633 (online) for submission instructions, subscription and all other information visit: wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eff  