ecology of freshwater fish 2014: 23: 1 editorial © 2013 crown copyright. ecology of freshwater fish © 2013 john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish eu eeliad: anguillid eels: conserving a global fishery alan m. walker1, eric feunteun2, julian metcalfe1, russell poole3, david righton1 1centre for environment, fisheries and aquaculture science (cefas), pakefield road, lowestoft, suffolk uk 2museum national d’histoire naturelle, marine station of dinard, umr 7208 borea, 38 rue du port blanc, 35800, dinard, france 3fisheries ecosystem advisory services, marine institute, furnace, newport, co. mayo ireland concern has increased in recent years that the sus- tainability of anguillid eel populations around the globe is threatened by sustained consumer demand, especially if some of the fishing pressure on declin- ing temperate species is transferred to tropical spe- cies. however, there are gaps in our knowledge of eel biology and assessment that are hindering eel and habitat management programmes. this situation can be improved by developing a more integrated under- standing of eel biology and using this understanding to overcome the challenges facing those with a stake in the conservation of eels worldwide. the eu eeliad ‘anguillid eels – conserving a glo- bal fishery’ theme session of the sixth world fisher- ies congress (edinburgh, scotland) brought together more than 200 scientists drawn from over 30 coun- tries across five continents to share their experience and expert global knowledge of anguillid eels, their biology, conservation and management, and to iden- tify the factors that will lead to a sustainable future for anguillid eel stocks worldwide. what we all expe- rienced was the facilitation of a more integrated understanding of eel biology and population dynam- ics, and a better appreciation of how this understand- ing facing fishermen, consumers, engineers, producers and man- agers. can interface with the challenges overall, 49 oral presentations were given and 68 posters presented and, while these were dominated by anguilla anguilla, anguilla rostrata and anguilla japonica, a further eight eel species, both tropical and temperate, were represented. the following 10 papers in this issue each focussed on a particular scientific problem representing the diversity of eel science that was presented at the theme session and which chal- lenges everyone engaged in the conservation and management of these unique species. correspondence: a. m. walker, centre for environment, fisheries and aquaculture science (cefas), pakefield road, lowestoft, suffolk, uk. e-mail: alan. walker@cefas.co.uk this article is published with the permission of the controller of hmso and the queen’s printer for scotland. doi: 10.1111/eff.12104 1  