ecology of freshwater fish 2016: 25: 60–71 ó 2014 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning in a european river between a non-native invader, the racer goby and a threatened native fish, the european bullhead tomasz kakareko1,2, jarosław kobak3, małgorzata poznanska3, łukasz jermacz3, gordon h. copp2,4,5 1department of hydrobiology, nicolaus copernicus university, torun, poland 2centre for conservation ecology & environmental sciences, bournemouth university, poole, uk 3department of invertebrate zoology, nicolaus copernicus university, torun, poland 4centre for environment, fisheries & aquaculture sciences, lowestoft, uk 5environmental and life sciences graduate program, trent university, peterborough, on canada accepted for publication september 7, 2014 abstract – we conducted underwater surveys using scuba gear to examine habitat and microhabitat competition between the ponto-caspian racer goby babka gymnotrachelus and native european bullhead cottus gobio to assess the potential for competitive displacement of the native species by the invading species. in summer, 88 surveys were made in a tributary of the river vistula within defined benthic areas across the entire width of the river bed. the occurrence of fish by total length class (small: <6 cm; large: >6 cm) and environmental conditions (depth, water velocity, substratum type, plant cover, shelter type) was recorded. we found a substantial separation between the species and size classes in relation to substratum, shelter type and water velocity. european bullheads were limited to lotic areas with stony bottoms, whereas racer gobies also occupied lentic areas over sand or mud. european bullheads usually took refuge under stones in contrast to a wider range of shelters used by racer goby, including tree roots and rubbish. in general, the breadth of habitat used by the racer goby was wider than that of the european bullhead, although habitat overlap between the species was not statistically significant except for the type of shelter occupied by small fish, selecting smaller stones. an inverse relationship was observed between small european bullheads and all racer gobies in areas where they co-occurred, suggesting that invader may be having an adverse effect on the distribution and habitat use of small native bullheads, particularly in areas of moderate water velocities over small stones and gravel. key words: babka gymnotrachelus; cottus gobio; invasive; habitat overlap; scuba diving introduction biological invasions are currently regarded as one of the main causes of species extinctions, but evidence of this is not always available. several species of ponto-caspian goby are among the most successful invaders of european inland waters, spreading along rivers and canal systems to colonise new environ- ments (copp et al. 2005; f€ureder & p€ockl 2007; grabowska et al. 2010). they are likely to pose a threat to native fishes of similar size and environmen- tal biology, and this is particularly relevant to the european bullhead cottus gobio (jurajda et al. 2005; cammaerts et al. 2012; kakareko et al. 2013), which is a target species for conservation under annex ii of the european community habitats directive 92/43/ eec and a species regarded as vulnerable and pro- tected by law in poland (witkowski et al. 2009). this supposition is supported by reports of declines in the european bullhead populations, coinciding with go- correspondence: t. kakareko, department of hydrobiology, nicolaus copernicus university, lwowska 1, 87-100 torun, poland. e-mail: kakar@umk.pl 60 doi: 10.1111/eff.12191 biidae invasions in the river danube (jurajda et al. 2005). moreover, one of these species, the round goby neogobius melanostomus, has been demon- strated to have an adverse impact on the mottled scul- pin cottus bairdii (dubs & corkum 1996), a north american cottid of very similar environmental biol- ogy to the european bullhead. indeed, the round goby was found to outcompete the mottled sculpin for shelters in laboratory experiments (janssen & jude 2001), and trawl catches of mottled sculpin declined rapidly following the round goby invasion of the north american great lakes (lauer et al. 2004; kornis et al. 2012). in europe, at least four species of ponto-caspian goby are successfully invading inland waters to the west and north of their native ranges. among these, the racer goby babka gymnotrachelus has established itself in parts of the river vistula catchment where the native european bullhead is present (marszał et al. 2004; grabowska et al. 2010; t. kakareko, personal observation). both species are territorial bot- tom-dwellers of comparable size, mainly up to 10–15 cm total length (tl), and both are associated with crevice refuges in running and still waters (pin- chuk et al. 2003; tomlinson & perrow 2003), which makes them potential competitors for refuges. recent laboratory studies have found the invading racer goby to be much more aggressive than native european bullhead of similar size in competition for food (ka- kareko et al. 2013) and shelter (jermacz et al. 2014). this suggests that the european bullhead is likely to be outcompeted and displaced to suboptimal habitats or even extirpated in the environments invaded by the racer goby. however, experimental results should be interpreted cautiously and cannot be simply extrapolated to natural conditions because they have been conducted at restricted spatial and temporal scales that force the test specimens to compete for limited resources. in the wild, animals can reduce or avoid the impact of competition through the spatial and/or temporal partitioning of habitat and dietary resources (schoener 1974). when this is the case, a non-native species may coexist with a native species through resource partitioning (gjelland et al. 2007; fobert et al. 2011; guo et al. 2012). thus, to clarify the potential threat posed by non-native racer goby to the native european bullhead, it is vital to determine the extent to which the two species partition or com- pete for resources in the wild. both species are reported to inhabit lentic and lotic environments, although circumstantial evidence (smirnov 1986; pinchuk et al. 2003; kakareko & pawlikowska 2009; kakareko 2011) suggests that the racer goby may favour lower water velocities than the european bullhead. the european bullhead is known to occur in a range of water course types, underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning including fast-flowing streams to medium-sized riv- ers (e.g. gaudin & caillere 1990; copp 1992; fi- scher & kummer 2000; knaepkens et al. 2002; carter et al. 2004). as such, there is a wide range of intermediate habitats in which both species could co-occur, with a potential adverse effect of the invading racer goby on the european bullhead popu- lation. little is known of the adaptations of the racer goby to habitats outside its native range, nor of its ability to colonise lotic environments. interactions between the two species in open waters have not previously been examined. thus, is unclear whether (and to what extent) the racer goby may be inciting changes in the distribution and resource use of european bullhead, and whether or not these result such as habitat in adverse consequences displacement and reduced fitness. it to the concurrent as a complement laboratory- based experimental studies mentioned here above (kakareko et al. 2013; jermacz et al. 2014), the aim of this study was to assess the level of spatial habi- tat segregation between the racer goby and euro- pean bullhead in a medium-sized european river, where the two species have recently co-existed for a few years. we used scuba diving to record fish presence and environmental conditions in various habitats across the entire riverbed, with the specific objectives to: (i) determine the habitat utilisation of the fishes in terms of depth, water velocity, substra- tum, shelter type and macrophyte cover; (ii) mea- sure the degree of overlap of resource use between the two species; and (iii) relationships between size classes of both species for habitats where they co-occur. we hypothesised that the racer goby would be able to exert a negative effect upon the european bullhead in areas where they co-occur, but we also expected that both species could avoid competition to a large extent through habitat parti- tioning (e.g. stak_enas et al. 2013), which would make it unlikely that invading racer goby would cause the total extirpation of the european bullhead at a large spatial (river catchment) scale. these results would be helpful in assessing the likelihood of stable coexistence between the european bullhead and racer goby. this could be particularly useful in evaluating the conservation status and vulnerability of local european bullhead populations, as well as in designing protection measures for this species in europe. test for methods study area the study was conducted in the lower river brda, a tributary of the river vistula, which is part of the 61 kakareko et al. the lower 0 41.472″e and 53°8 baltic sea drainage basin. the river brda is 238 km long, draining an area of 4661 km2 (imgw, marine division in gdynia 2006), and runs via a narrow val- ley with a deep cut channel, forming numerous meanders. the study was undertaken along a 5.7-km- river course (between long section of 0 53°11 8.88″n, 17°57 40.559″n, 17°58 8.076″e) located within the borders of the city of bydgoszcz in north-western poland (400,000 inhabitants), comprising the main part of a larger river section between the smukalski reservoir and the river’s confluence with bydgoski canal (fig. 1). the mean annual discharge of the river stretch is 27.3 m3s  1 (imgw, marine division in gdynia 2006), and its maximum depth is around 3.5 m (t. kakareko, personal observation). the river stretch was surrounded by residential land plots with houses, recreational gardens and thick riparian vegetation composed mainly of grey alder alnus incana. the explored section of the river provides drinking water to bydgoszcz (małecka & donderski 2006) and the water in the study area is relatively clear, with a low concentration of suspended particles, which makes in situ underwater observations viable. the water visi- bility was at least 4–5 m (the distance at which a secchi disc vanishes to a diver observing it underwa- ter near surface). this stretch of the river retains rela- tively hydraulic diversity, with shallow parts covered by macrophytes, beds of flowering rush butomus umbellatus in areas of elevated water velocity and a variety of other plant taxa (e.g. hornworts ceratophyllum sp., water mil- foils myriophyllum sp.) common in lentic areas. mac- rophytes were scarce in the deepest parts of the main channel. the typical bottom type in the studied sec- tion is composed of sand in lentic areas and stones and/or loam in lotic areas. elevated morphological and 0 0 62 fig. 1. study site. survey procedure to explore a broad range of habitat underwater surveys took place (by the same diver) between 13:00 and 18:00 from 19 july to 6 septem- ber 2011 at 88 locations during 19 daytime excur- sions. the locations were chosen across the entire river bed, from the near-bank areas to the main river current types, although dense beds of submerged macrophytes were not explored because of poor accessibility for scuba divers. we were careful to choose locations randomly by accessing the water alongside the river stretch both from the shore and by a rubber dingy. however, owing to technical difficulties, explorations were carried out more intensively in areas with easy access. at each location, an area of 1–25 m2 (esti- mated using a hand-held ruler) was explored, with its borders defined on the basis of environmental homo- geneity (to set a uniform area for exploration) and diver accessibility. moving in an upstream direction, the scuba diver noted the numbers and size classes (> or <6 cm tl) of the two species observed without turning over objects (henceforth, the ‘surface obser- vations’) and then gently overturned stones, roots and rubbish to document the numbers and size of the fish hidden in shelters (henceforth, the ‘shelter obser- vations’) and thus estimating the total number of fish present within the survey plot. the diver was not large able to move large objects (e.g. boulders, pieces of wood), but to such objects were carefully inspected in order to record fish occurring near or in the entrances of these shel- ters. fish counts were divided by the surface areas of particular locations to adjust for differences in shelter sizes. however, these area-corrected fish counts can- not be used as direct estimators of fish density because the diver may have underestimated fish the areas adjacent table 1. environmental variables used in the study. percentage values in parentheses indicate the shares of particular habitat categories at all observed sites. variable variable levels variable coding for the analysis underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning (a) substratum (composition of the bottom) (b) shelters (objects at which fish were spotted) (c) water velocity (d) macrophyte cover (e) depth sand (39%) *x gravel (7%) * loam (2%) * mud (3%) * sand with a layer of mud (5%) * stones (21%) (5–30 cm) * x boulders (20%) (>30 cm) * x mussel shells (3%) zebra mussel colonies (1%) tree roots (1%) large stones (>30 cm) (18%) * x medium stones (1–30 cm) (27%) * x small stones (<15 cm) (33%) * x tree roots (12%) * x rubbish (9%) * plants (2%) no shelter (freely swimming fish) undetectable (19%) * x weak: 0.1–0.3 ms  1 (23%) * x moderate: 0.3–0.6 ms fast: 0.6–1.0 ms  1 (25%) * x no plants (50%) * x with sparse plants around (6%) * x near a plant bed (28%) * x within a plant bed (16%) * x for cca analysis: continuous variable: 0.3–3.5 m * for other analyses: categorised into 6 levels with a 0.5-m step: [0–0.5), [0.5–1.0), [1.0–1.5), [1.5–2.0), [2.0–2.5), [2.5 –3.5) m x; the last category pooled as only three sites exceeded 3 m in depth  1 (33%) * x for each substratum type at a given site: score 3 for primary substratum (covering most of the area), 2 for secondary substratum (20–50% of the area), 1 for accessory substratum (<20%). if secondary and/or accessory substrata were not present, then the corresponding scores were added to the primary substratum score. for each shelter type (dummy variable): 1 if the fish were present at a given structure, 0 otherwise; freely swimming fish were dropped from the analysis including this variable 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 as exact value 1–6, step 1 asterisks indicate variable categories included in the cca analysis. ‘x’ marks indicate variable categories included in the anova and/or g-test analyses. counts in some locations due to their particular char- acter. by assuming that detection was constant between species and habitats, counts are sufficient to compare the distributions of both species relative to each other. at locations where fish were found, substratum composition, shelter types, macrophyte cover, water velocity and water depth were assessed (table 1), with the occurrence of other fish species also noted. substratum composition was estimated visually as percentage cover of the bottom (table 1a): (i) pri- mary type (>50% cover), (ii) secondary (20% < x < 50% cover) and (iii) accessory (<20% cover). shelters were submerged objects under which single fish or their small groups were observed (table 1b). water velocity was estimated by a diver subjectively at an ordinal scale at each location (table 1c). to calibrate the diver’s perception, measurements of water velocity were made 7 cm above the bottom using a stingray velocity metre with a submerged ultrasonic sensor (greyline instruments inc., long sault, canada; accuracy of 2%; range: 0.03– 3.05 ms  1) at various locations of water depth and velocity where measurements could be taken. water depth was measured with a dive computer (model vyper, suunto, finland) to an accuracy of 0.1 m. data analysis to reveal patterns in the data with regard to relation- ships of both species and size classes (four response variables) with environmental variables, two canoni- cal correspondence analyses (cca) were conducted on log-transformed data. the data set in the first analysis included fish area-corrected counts at 70 sur- vey locations where at least one fish was recorded (from both surface and shelter observations), with the following environmental variables recorded: substra- tum type, water velocity, macrophyte cover and water depth. the data set in the second cca included only fish counts from the ‘shelter observations’ (101 sepa- rate shelters in 54 locations) where fish were recorded when turning over submerged objects; this cca allowed us to add shelter type to the same list of environmental variables as included in the first cca. the significance of the relationships between fish groups and environmental variables along partic- ular cca axes was tested using permutation tests 63 kakareko et al. with 500 replicates. cca analyses were carried out using vegan 1.15.1 package for r (oksanen et al. 2011). habitat categories with <2% shares in the studied part of the river, as well as those where no fish were observed (e.g. shells), were excluded from the cca analyses (table 1). to assess the effect of substratum type on the occurrence of particular fish groups (each species and size class combination separately), a general linear model (glm) was applied with primary substratum type as a categorical variable, with the following co- variates used to test for the other fish effects (includ- ing size): (i) for small goby: large conspecific count; (ii) for small bullhead: large conspecific count, small goby count and large goby count; (iii) for large bull- head: small goby count and large goby count. the choice of covariates for these analyses was based on specific hypotheses on potential, preselected relation- ships between particular fish size classes. we assumed that large fish may influence the distribution of smaller conspecifics and the presence of a racer goby may influence the occurrences of european bullheads. the interaction terms of particular covari- ates with substratum type were also included in the analyses to check whether or not the potential rela- tionships between species/size groups vary with dif- ferent substrata. if these interactions were significant, then the regression slopes for the particular levels of the categorical variable were compared with one another (as described by sokal & rohlf 1995). the effect of water velocity on fish occurrence was assessed using a one-way anova for each species/size class combination separately. the use of other fish groups as covariates in these analyses was impossible due to insufficient co-occurrence of species at the extreme values of water velocities. one-way anovas were also used to check for the effects of macrophytes and water depth on fish occurrence. the data for anovas were log-transformed to avoid violations of normality and homoscedasticity assumptions (checked with shapiro–wilk and levene tests respectively). habitat categories recorded at <10 survey locations were excluded from the analyses (table 1). the tukey test was used as a post hoc procedure for sig- nificant effects of the categorical variables in anova. utilisation of shelter types was compared between fish groups using a three-way g-test of independence, with the following factors: (i) fish size, (ii) species and (iii) shelter type as the response variable. all interactions of the response variable with the other factors were tested. shelter types found during fewer than five observations were excluded from the analy- ses (table 1). czekanowski’s index (cz) was used to estimate the degree of habitat overlap (schoener 1974) between fish groups with regards to substratum, 64 shelter type, water velocity, macrophyte cover, water xn depth: cz ¼ 1   0:5 jp1i   p2ij ! i¼1 where p1i, p2i are the numbers of fish from the com- pared groups, occupying the habitat i, divided by the total counts of these groups; n is the number of habi- tat categories. czekanowski’s index ranges from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (full overlap), with values >0.6 assumed to be biologically meaningful (wallace 1981). moreover, a randomisation test (i.e. reshuf- fling all habitat category shares within each fish group) was applied to check the probability of obtain- ing actual index values by chance. habitat breadth was calculated for each fish species and habitat variable using a simpson diversity index (d): d ¼ 1= xn ðp2 þ i i¼1 where pi is the number of fish from a given group occupying the habitat i divided by the total count of this group; n is the number of habitat categories. the higher the index value, the wider the resource spec- trum used by a fish group. habitat breadths of partic- ular fish groups were compared with one another using pair-wise randomisation tests (by pooling all fish from both compared groups and then randomly attributing each individual to one of the groups with the group counts fixed). all of the randomisation tests were carried out using microsoft excelâ 2010 (microsoft, redmond, washington, usa) with 200 replicates. the results were regarded as significant at a two-tailed p-value of 0.05. results altogether, 440 m2 of the river bottom was surveyed and 395 individual fish were observed, including 68 large gobies, 194 small gobies, 38 large bullheads and 95 small bullheads. goby and bullhead mean counts in the river were 66 and 64 fish per 100 m2 respec- tively. other fish species were recorded at 78.7% of all locations, with goby and bullhead frequencies being 55.1% and 47.2% respectively. these two spe- cies were observed together at 23.6% of the locations. the cca ordination of fish groups and environ- mental variables revealed substratum, shelter type and water velocity to account for most of the varia- tion in the data set, with the two species clearly sepa- rated along cca axis 1 (cca1) and the two size classes separated along cca2 (fig. 2). bullheads were associated with lotic areas with coarse substra- tum (boulders), whereas gobies occupied sandy and/ (a) (b) fish fig. 2. canonical correspondence analyses ordination of groups and environmental variables. substratum types are given in italics, shelter types underlined. (a). the densities of all fish (surface and shelter observations) with shelter type excluded from the analysis: axis 1 explains 36.5% of variance (eigenvalue: 0.54, p = 0.002), axis 2 is not significant (eigenvalue: 0.08, p = 0.528) (b). counts of fish from shelter observations (with the fish observed outside the shelter excluded) with shelter type included into the analysis: axis 1 explains 27.5% of variance (eigenvalue: 0.54, p = 0.002), axis 2 explains 17% of variance (eigenvalue: 0.34, p = 0.002). or muddy lentic locations more often than bullheads. bullheads were found mainly under stones, whereas gobies also used tree roots and solid rubbish as shel- ters (fig. 2b). the effect of variables associated with cca2 axis only became significant after including shelter type into the analysis (fig. 2). both small underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning gobies and small bullheads were observed over gravel and stone substrata, with small stones used as shelters. large individuals of both species more often occupied bottoms covered by boulders and took shel- ters under large stones. the presence of plants and water depth were less important in differentiating among particular fish groups. p = 0.2386; f1,70 = 1.4, in terms of substratum type, the counts of all fish size classes except large gobies differed significantly (glm, full details of the statistical analysis are given in the table s1), with small gobies being signifi- cantly less common over boulders and all bullheads achieving lower counts over sand (tukey’s post hoc test, fig. 3a). counts of large and small gobies were related to each other, but this relationship depended on substratum type, as evidenced by a significant interaction substratum x large goby (f2,70 = 5.8, p = 0.0048). a positive relationship occurred over stony substrata, whereas a negative relationship between large and small gobies was observed over sandy bottoms (fig. 4a). no significant relationships between gobies and large bullheads were found f2,70 = 1.6, (glm, p = 0.2045). the relationship between large gobies and small bullheads was negative over all substrata (fig. 4b), as indicated also by a significant covariate in glm (f1,70 = 7.3, p = 0.0085) and an effect (f2,70 = 1.3, insignificant p = 0.2923). the substratum-dependent shapes of relationships between small bullheads and small gobies, as well as between small and large bullheads, were indicated by significant substratum 9 fish count interactions of the respective species in glm (f2,70 = 3.7, p = 0.0293; f2,70 = 4.5, p = 0.0145). these relationships were negative over boulders and stones, but not over sand (fig. 4c,d), probably due to the very low abundance of bullheads in sandy habi- tats. the variety substratum types used by gobies were significantly wider than that of bullheads of similar size (fig. 6a). moreover, small fish used a wider range than large fish. no significant overlaps in substratum use were observed, except between small and large bullheads (fig. 7a). interaction term use of shelters varied significantly (p < 0.0001) among fish species and size classes (species 9 shel- ter: g6 = 35.0; fish size 9 shelter type: g6 = 70.1). bullheads used mostly stones of various sizes (fig. 5), whereas gobies were also found under other objects (tree roots, rubbish or even plants); this shows that bullheads were much more specialised than gobies with regard to shelter type, resulting in a sig- nificantly narrower range of shelter types used by small individuals of c. gobio (fig. 6b). large fish (both gobies and bullheads) differed from small indi- viduals in using larger stones as shelters (fig. 5). the overlap between shelter types occupied by small 65 kakareko et al. (a) (c) (b) (d) fig. 3. fish occurrence (numbers of individuals noted per m2 of explored area) on various substratum types (a), water velocities (b), levels of macrophyte cover (c) and water depths (d). bars labelled with the same symbols indicate habitat categories that did not differ signifi- cantly (tukey post-hoc test) from one another with regard to fish occurrence. gravel substratum was excluded from a formal analysis due to insufficient number of replicates, though the data are presented. gobies and bullheads was the only interspecific overlap in the study that turned out to be significantly greater than random (fig. 7b). regarding water velocity, depth and macrophyte presence, fish counts differed significantly among various velocity conditions for all fish groups (anova, see table s2). in general, gobies clearly occupied lentic locations (with undetectable to low velocities), whereas bullheads selected moderate to fast water velocities (fig. 3b). the range of water velocities occupied by gobies was generally wider than those of bullheads (fig. 6c). particularly the range used by large bullheads was narrowest and limited to fast velocities only. the greatest overlaps occurred between conspecifics of different sizes (fig. 7c), whereas those between different species were signifi- cantly lower than expected from a random model. the effect of water depth on fish occurrence was (f5,82 = 2.9, only significant p = 0.0174), which avoided intermediate depths between 1 and 2.5 m (fig. 3d). overlaps in water small gobies for 66 depth use were clearly greater between conspecific size classes than between different species (fig. 7e). the range of depths used by small european bull- heads was narrower than that occupied by racer gobies (fig. 6e). macrophyte presence did not have a significant effect on fish occurrences (fig. 3c) as was observed in anova. the overlap indices seemed considerably high, exceeding the threshold value of 0.6, but none of them differed significantly from a random value (fig. 7d). discussion this underwater study in the river brda revealed a significant inverse relationship between the invading racer goby and small native european bullheads in the areas inhabited by both species. this suggests that the invader may be adversely affecting small bullheads where racer goby are present. however, the results also reveal that the two species are parti- (a) (c) underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning (b) (d) fig. 4. relationships among the fish groups on various substrata revealed by the general linear model analysis. (a) large goby versus small bullhead; (b) small goby versus small bullhead; (c) large bullhead versus small bullhead; (d) large goby versus small goby. no effect of the other fish groups on large bullheads have been found. fish occurrences are numbers of individuals noted per m2 of explored area). asterisks indicate slopes significantly different from 0: *0.05 > p > 0.01, **0.01 > p > 0.001, ***p < 0.001. the slopes labelled with the same symbols did not differ significantly from one another. fig. 5. distributions of fish groups among various shelter types. distributions of fish groups labelled with the same symbols did not differ significantly from one another (pair-wise g-tests). fig. 6. habitat breadth for particular environmental resource categories measured as simpson index. bars labelled with the same symbols within each column show fish groups that did not differ significantly with regard to the range breadth of used resources. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 67 kakareko et al. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) fig. 7. czekanowski’s indices of habitat overlap among the groups of fish (lg – large goby, sg – small goby, lb – large bullhead, sb – small bullhead). the vertical lines denote the border value of 0.6, regarded as an indication of a considerable overlap. asterisks indicate the overlaps that were significantly greater or lower than those predicted by a random model. tioning habitat (substratum type, shelter type and water velocity), which indicates that in this large the intensity of adverse competitive lowland river, interactions between the species may be lower than suggested by laboratory experiments (kakareko et al. 2013). racer gobies occurred mainly at the margins of the main channel, where water velocities are relatively low and the river bottom is characterised by variable firmness and a wide spectrum of submerged objects (stones, tree roots, rubbish or plants) is available as shelter habitat. association with lentic riverine habi- tats is characteristic of the racer goby, suggesting that these locations are optimal for the species. in the river vistula (poland), racer gobies were more abun- dant in fish surveys (seine netting, electrofishing) in the włocławek reservoir (kakareko & pawlikowska than in the river’s more natural sections 2009) (kakareko et al. 2009), suggesting that the racer gobies benefit from the lower water velocities and greater accumulations of fine sediments that result from human alterations to the river channel. recent laboratory experiments have shown that the racer goby, irrespective of size, prefer a water velocity of 0.1 ms  1 over higher and lower velocities; and they select muddy bottoms over gravel, sand and stones (kakareko 2011). racer goby mostly occupied other substrata, such as sand, stones and gravel, probably due to the scarcity of their pre- ferred muddy substrata. moreover, they also occurred in areas with water velocities of 0.2–0.4 ms  1, far beyond the preferred range of water velocities observed in laboratory experiments (kakareko loc. cit.). as such, racer gobies in the river brda appear to have established themselves in suboptimal habitats in terms of bottom type and water velocity. this sug- gests that the habitat plasticity of the racer goby, in particular its ability to occupy suboptimal environ- ments and use a variety of submerged objects as ref- uges, facilitates the species’ expansion into new in the river brda, 68 areas. larger gobies were observed to excavate cavi- ties underneath stones or pieces of wood in areas of soft substrata, actively creating their own refuges from elevated water velocities and predators. and habitat use. however, because european bullhead was most abundant in areas of the river brda with fast-flowing water and coarse substrata, where they make use of stones of various sizes as shelters. no significant effects of ponto-cas- pian racer goby were observed on large bullheads, which occupied boulder crevices with the highest water velocities, areas almost entirely devoid of the invading racer gobies. the range of habitats used by large european bullheads in the river brda was clearly narrower than that of the invading racer goby, and this could be interpreted to mean that the invad- ing racer goby has affected the native species’ abun- dance the remainder of this river system has been invaded by the racer goby, it was not possible to determine whether or not this is the case. large european bull- heads are usually reported to prefer areas with ele- vated water velocities and larger-grain sediments in water courses not yet invaded by ponto-caspian gobies (smyly 1957; mills & mann 1983; langford & hawkins 1997; carter et al. 2004; legalle et al. 2005; langford et al. 2012). european bullheads use crevices beneath stones for nesting (smyly 1957) and coarse bottom substrata are generally considered cru- cial for sustaining viable european bullhead popula- tions (knaepkens et al. 2002). accordingly, a clear limitation of large bullheads in the river brda might be the effect of their narrow preferences for coarse substrata, rather than the result of the presence of the racer goby. european bullheads are not efficient swimmers (tomlinson & perrow 2003; tudorache et al. 2008), and the presence of stones provides the european bullheads with lentic refuges close to the main current it should be noted that european bullheads have also been found in areas of low water velocity with (legalle et al. 2005). however, organic deposits on the bottom (vlach et al. 2005; gosselin & petts 2010) as well as in exposed tree roots along the banks of the lower, canalised stretches of the river great ouse, england (unpublished data from the study by copp 1997). this suggests that european bullhead may occupy what is considered suboptimal habitat in some circumstances, even when invasive racer gobies are not present, such as in eng- land, where european bullheads are common and abundant and therefore intraspecific competition is more likely. although we observed a clear habitat segregation between the racer goby and large specimens of euro- pean bullhead in the river brda, most pronounced in the case of water velocity, this was not the case of small bullheads. the latter displayed a significant habitat overlap with small gobies with regard to shel- ter type, and they were inversely related with both large and small gobies in shared areas, suggesting that the competition for refuges between the fish is likely and the alien species may adversely affect small european bullheads. experimental data suggest (jermacz et al. 2014) that the racer goby is more aggressive than the resident european bullhead and, if equal in size, the former won the competition for the shelter. thus, racer gobies are likely to exert a negative impact on the recruitment of small euro- pean bullheads by monopolising parts of the river with intermediate water velocities over stony or gravely substrata. access to such habitats might be particularly important for the fish to reduce intraspe- cific competition for food and shelter, given that smaller coarsely grained substrata are not preferred by large conspecifics (davey et al. 2005; van lieffe- ringe et al. 2005). according to bless et al. (1983, 1990), european bullhead exploit a variety of water velocities between 0.2 and 1.0 ms  1 over diversified bottom substrata, so juveniles and adults can find their optimal conditions for survival and reproduc- tion. the occurrence of small bullheads in the river brda was inversely correlated to the presence of gobies and to the presence of large conspecifics, which suggests that if they are displaced from their present habitats by the invaders, they could face increased intraspecific competition. water depth and submerged plants had a less dis- tinctive influence on the distribution of racer goby and european bullhead than water velocity and bot- tom substrata. some variability in the depth distribu- tion was observed, but the reason for this is not clear. it might be linked to the reactions of fish to water velocities and bottom type, which were of the great- est importance. racer gobies avoided medium depths, probably because water current was too strong for them. consequently, shallow banks, where the water velocity is slower than in deeper parts, were selected underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning by small gobies. furthermore, racer gobies may find a better protection against predators here than in dee- per water, which is penetrated by large piscivorous fishes (schlosser 1988; ekl€ov et al. 1994). we com- monly observed individuals of eurasian perch perca fluviatilis during our underwater surveys in the river brda. płąchocki et al. (2012) found that the diet of larger perch (>15 cm sl) in the river vistula was dominated by monkey goby neogobius fluviatilis and racer goby. older gobies have to move into deeper water to protect themselves against terrestrial pisci- vores, as increasing body size renders fish vulnerable to attacks by wading predators (schlosser 1987; har- vey & stewart 1991). small racer gobies were observed to select the deepest parts of the river, but this was mainly in the areas located off the main channel, with stony bottoms, providing refuge from water velocities and predators. large european bull- heads avoided shallow waters and small specimens avoided both shallow and deep waters, but the reason for this is unclear. it may result from interactions between the two species, or the fact that deeper waters are richer in coarse substrata (preferred by bullhead). no associations were observed between fish and macrophytes, although it should be noted that the most dense macrophyte beds were not inves- tigated because they could not be surveyed quantita- tively by scuba divers. our results suggest that macrophytes in fast-flowing water courses are less suitable refuge for the fish than are solid substrata, which seem to provide better refuge from elevated water velocity. indeed, european bullheads are reported to use macrophytes, leaf litter and woody debris as refuges against elevated water velocities and predators, but experiments revealed that euro- pean bullheads preferred stones >12 cm diameter over macrophytes as a refuge (tomlinson & perrow 2003). the present study provides important insights to our impact of invading understanding of the potential racer gobies on native european bullheads, revealing that the european bullhead is likely to be able to per- sist in fast-flowing rivers despite invasions by racer goby because of the substantial habitat segregation between the two species, which is shaped mainly by their different preferences for water velocity. whereas, european bullheads are likely to be displaced from areas where racer gobies find suitable conditions, that is lentic river stretches and lakes. this could result in the european bullhead’s range being reduced through competition, which forces them to occupy suboptimal conditions with potential fitness consequences. in light of the potential adverse impact on european bull- head, which is already regarded as vulnerable in most parts of continental europe, further studies are needed to clarify this issue. 69 kakareko et al. acknowledgements we would like to express our thanks to m. budrewicz for his assistance in fieldwork. we are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments that helped improve our paper. our research was supported by a grant of the pol- ish ministry of science and higher education no. n n304 371539. participation of g.h. copp was possible thanks to support from the uk department of environment, food & rural affairs. references bless, r. 1983. untersuchungen zur substratpr€aferenz der groppe, cottus gobio l. 1758 (pisces cottidae). sencken- bergiana biologia 63: 161–165. (original not seen, cited by van liefferinge, c., seeuws, p., meire, p. & verheyen, r.f. 2005). bless, r. 1990. die bedeutung von gew€asserbaulichen hind- ernissen im raum-zeit-system der groppe (cottus gobio l.). natur und landschaft 65: 581–585. (original not seen, cited by van liefferinge, c., seeuws, p., meire, p. & verheyen, r.f. 2005). cammaerts, r., spikmans, f., van kessel, n., verreycken, h., cherot, f., demol, t. & richez, s. 2012. colonization of the border meuse area (the netherlands and belgium) by the non-native western tubenose goby proterorhinus semilunaris (heckel, 1837) (teleostei, gobiidae). aquatic invasions 7: 251–258. carter, m.g., copp, g.h. & szomolai, v. 2004. seasonal abundance and microhabitat use of bullhead cottus gobio and accompanying fish species in the river avon (hamp- shire), and implications for conservation. aquatic conserva- tion: marine & freshwater ecosystems 14: 395–412. copp, g.h. 1992. an empirical model for predicting the microhabitat of 0 + juveniles in lowland streams. oecologia 91: 338–345. copp, g.h. 1997. microhabitat use of fish larvae and juve- niles in a highly regulated section of the river great ouse. regulated rivers: research & management 13: 267–276. copp, g.h., bianco, p., bogutskaya, n., er}os, t., falka, i., ferreira, m.t., fox, m.g., freyhof, j., gozlan, r.e., grab- owska, j., kovac, v., moreno-amich, r., naseka, a.m., penaz, m., povz, m., przybylski, m., robillard, m., russell, i.c., stak_enas, s., sumer, s., vila-gispert, a. & wiesner, c. 2005. to be, or not to be, a non-native freshwater fish? journal of applied ichthyology 21: 242–262. davey, a., hawkins, s. & turner, g. 2005. size-dependent microhabitat use and intraspecific competition in cottus gobio. journal of fish biology 67: 428–433. dubs, d.o. & corkum, l.d. 1996. behavioral interactions between round gobies (neogobius melanostomus) and mot- tled sculpins journal of great lakes research 22: 838–844. (cottus bairdi). ekl€ov, a.g., greenberg, l.a. & kristinsen, h. 1994. the effect of depth on the interaction between perch (perca flu- viatilis) and minnow (phoxinus phoxinus). ecology of freshwater fish 3: 1–8. fischer, s. & kummer, h. 2000. effects of residual flow and fragmentation on distribution and movement of habitat 70 bullhead (cottus gobio l.) in an alpine stream. hydrobiolo- gia 422: 305–317. fobert, e., fox, m.g., ridgway, m. & copp, g.h. 2011. heated competition: how climate change will affect compet- ing non-native pumpkinseed and eurasian perch in the u.k. journal of fish biology 79: 1592–1607. f€ureder, l. & p€ockl, m. 2007. ecological traits of aquatic nis invading austrian fresh waters. in: gherardi, f., ed. biological invaders in inland waters: profiles, distribution, and threats. netherlands: springer, pp 233–259. gaudin, p. & caillere, l. 1990. microdistribution of cottus gobio l. and fry of salmo_trutta l. in a first order stream. polskie archiwum hydrobiologii 37: 81–83. gjelland, k., bohn, t. & amundsen, p. 2007. is coexistence mediated by microhabitat segregation? an in-depth explora- tion of a fish invasion. journal of fish biology 71: 196–209. gosselin, m. & petts, g. 2010. mesohabitat use by bullhead (cottus gobio). hydrobiologia 652: 299–310. grabowska, j., kotusz, j. & witkowski, a. 2010. alien inva- sive fish species in polish waters: an overview. folia zoo- logica 59: 73–85. guo, z., liu, j., lek, s., li, z., ye, s., zhu, f., tang, j. & cucherousset, j. 2012. habitat segregation between two con- generic and introduced goby species. fundamental and applied limnology 181: 241–251. harvey, b.c. & stewart, a.j. 1991. fish size and habitat depth relationships in headwater streams. oecologia 87: 336–342. imgw, marine division in gdynia, 2006. the lower river vistula watershed. determining the areas under direct flood risk for justified restoration of floodplains. 13. river brda. a white paper by the institute of meteorology and water management (imgw), available at: http://www.rzgw.gda. pl/cms/site.files/file/oki/publikacjamap/brda/brdaopisopra- cowania.pdf (in polish), gdynia, 30 pp. janssen, j. & jude, d.j. 2001. recruitment failure of mottled in calumet harbor, southern lake sculpin cottus bairdi induced by the newly introduced round goby michigan, neogobius melanostomus. journal of great lakes research 27: 319–328. jermacz, ł., kobak, j., dzier_zynska, a. & kakareko, t. 2014. the effect of flow on the competition between the alien racer goby and native european bullhead. ecology of fresh- water fish, doi:10.1111/eff.12162. jurajda, p., cerny, j. & polacik, m. 2005. the recent distribu- tion and abundance of non-native neogobius fishes in the slovak section of the river danube. journal of applied ich- thyology 21: 319–323. kakareko, t. 2011. influence of selected factors on distribu- tion and habitat preferences of racer goby (neogobius gym- notrachelus kessler, 1857) and monkey goby (neogobius fluviatilis pallas, 1811), non-native fish in poland. habilita- tion thesis, nicolaus copernicus university press, torun, 128 pp (in polish with english summary). kakareko, t. & pawlikowska, k. 2009. relative abundance of ponto-caspian gobiids in seine net catches in the flooded area of (the vistula river) 2–3 years after first appearance. limnological papers 4: 69–77. the włocławek reservoir kakareko, t., płąchocki, d. & kobak, j. 2009. relative abun- dance of ponto-caspian gobiids in the lower vistula river (poland) 3– to 4 years after first appearance. journal of applied ichthyology 25: 647–651. kakareko, t., kobak, j., grabowska, j., jermacz, ł., przybyl- ski, m., poznanska, m., pietraszewski, d. & copp, g.h. 2013. competitive interactions for food resources between invasive racer goby babka gymnotrachelus and native european bullhead cottus gobio. biological invasions 15: 2519–2530. knaepkens, g., bruyndoncx, l., bervoets, l. & eens, m. 2002. the presence of artificial stones predicts the occur- rence of the european bullhead (cottus gobio) in a regulated lowland river in flanders (belgium). ecology of freshwater fish 11: 203–206. kornis, m.s., mercado-silva, n. & vander zanden, m.j. 2012. twenty years of invasion: a review of round goby neogobius melanostomus biology, spread and ecological implications. journal of fish biology 80: 235–285. langford, t.e. & hawkins, j. 1997. the distribution and abundance of three fish species in relation to timber debris and meso-habitats in a lowland forest stream during autumn and winter. limnetica 13: 93–102. langford, t.e., langford, j. & hawkins, s.j. 2012. conflict- ing effects of woody debris on stream fish populations: implications for management. freshwater biology 57: 1096–1111. lauer, t.e., allen, p.j. & mccomish, t.s. 2004. changes in mottled sculpin and johnny darter trawl catches after the appearance of round gobies in the indiana waters of lake michigan. transactions of the american fisheries society 133: 185–189. legalle, m., mastrorillo, s., santoul, f. & cereghino, r. 2005. ontogenetic microhabitat shifts in the bullhead, cottus gobio l., in a fast flowing stream. international review of hydrobiology 90: 310–321. małecka, m. & donderski, w. 2006. heterotrophic bacteria inhibiting water of the river brda on the bydgoszcz town section. baltic coastal zone 10: 5–14. marszał, l., ziezba, g., przybylski, m., grabowska, j. & kacz- kowski, z. 2004. monitoring of the ichthyofauna of the skrwa prawa river system. scientific annual of the polish angling association 17: 77–98. (in polish with english summary). mills, c.a. & mann, r.h.k. 1983. the bullhead cottus gobio, a versalite and successful fish. annual reports of the freshwater biological association 5: 76–88. oksanen, j., blanchet, f., kindt, r., legendre, p., minchin, p.r., o’hara, r., simpson, g.l., solymos, p., stevens, m.h.h. & wagner, h. 2011. vegan: community ecology package. r package version 1.17-5. available at: http:// cran.r-project.org/package=vegan. r-project org/pack age=vegan. pinchuk, v.i., vasileva, e.d., vasilev, v.p. & miller, p. 2003. neogobius gymnotrachelus (kessler, 1857). in: miller, p.j., ed. the freshwater fishes of europe, vol. 8. i mugili- dae, atherinidae, atherinopsidae, blenniidae, odontobuti- dae, gobiidae 1, wiesbaden: aula-verlag, pp 264–279. underwater evaluation of habitat partitioning płąchocki, d., kakareko, t. & kobak, j. 2012. first report on the importance of alien gobiids in the diet of native piscivo- rous fishes in the lower vistula river (poland). oceanologi- cal and hydrobiological studies 41: 83–89. schlosser, i.j. 1987. the role of predation in age- and size- related habitat use by stream fishes. ecology 66: 651–659. schlosser, i.j. 1988. predation risk and habitat selection by two size classes of a stream cyprinid: experimental test of a hypothesis. oikos 52: 36–40. schoener, t.w. 1974. resource partitioning in ecological communities. science 185: 27–39. smirnov, a.i. 1986. perciformes (gobioidei), scorpaenifor- mes, pleuronectiformes, gobiesociformes, lophiiformes. fauna ukrainy 8. ryby (5). naukova dumka, kiev (in russian). smyly, w.j.p. 1957. the life-history of the bullhead or mill- er’s thumb (cottus gobio l.). proceedings of the zoological society london 128: 431–453. sokal, r.r. & rohlf, f.j. 1995. biometry. the principles and practice of statistics in biological research. 3rd edn. new york: w.h. freeman and company, p 887. stak_enas, s., vilizzi, l. & copp, g.h. 2013. habitat use, home range, movements and interactions of introduced lep- omis gibbosus and native salmo_trutta in a small stream of southern england. ecology of freshwater fish 22: 202–215. tomlinson, m. & perrow, m. 2003. ecology of the bullhead. conserving natura 2000 rivers. ecology series no. 4. peter- borough: english nature, p 17. tudorache, c., viaene, p., blust, r., vereecken, h. & de bo- eck, g. 2008. a comparison of swimming capacity and energy use in seven european freshwater fish species. ecol- ogy of freshwater fish 17: 284–291. van liefferinge, c., seeuws, p., meire, p. & verheyen, r.f. 2005. microhabitat use and preferences of the endangered cottus gobio in the river voer, belgium. journal of fish biology 67: 897–909. vlach, p., dusek, j., svatora, m. & moravec, p. 2005. fish assemblage structure, habitat and microhabitat preference of five fish species in a small stream. folia zoologica 54: 421–431. wallace, r.k. 1981. an assessment of diet-overlap indexes. the american fisheries society 110: transactions of 72–76. witkowski, a., kotusz, j. & przybylski, m. 2009. the degree of threat to the freshwater ichthyofauna of poland: red list of fishes and lampreys – situation in 2009. chronmy przyr ojcz 65: 33–52. (in polish with english summary). supporting information additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article: table s1 glm analysis of the effect of substratum type and co-occurring fish on the area-corrected counts of the studied fish species and size classes. table s2 anova analysis of the effect of environ- mental variables on the area-corrected counts of the studied fish species and size classes. 71  