ecology of freshwater fish 2016: 25: 48–59 ó 2014 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish morphological changes during the transition from freshwater to sea water in an amphidromous goby, sicyopterus lagocephalus (pallas 1770) (teleostei) celine ellien1, ugo werner2, philippe keith2 1sorbonne universites, universite pierre et marie curie, umr 7208 (mnhn-cnrs-upmc-ird-uag-ucb), departement milieux et peuplements aquatiques, museum national d’histoire naturelle, 43 rue cuvier, cp26 75231, paris cedex 05, france 2museum national d’histoire naturelle, sorbonne universites, umr 7208 (mnhn-cnrs-upmc-ird-uag-ucb), departement milieux et peuplements aquatiques, museum national d’histoire naturelle, 43 rue cuvier, cp26 75231, paris cedex 05, france accepted for publication september 2, 2014 abstract – the widely distributed amphidromous goby sicyopterus lagocephalus needs drastic change of habitat to fulfil its life cycle: adults live and spawn in rivers, where eggs hatch into prolarvae that have to reach the sea to acquire characteristics of planktonic larvae. postlarvae return to rivers where they recruit and grow to the adult reproductive stage. here, we describe the prolarval stages, namely from hatching to first contact with sea water, as well as the first marine larval stages. the observations were made under experimental conditions. we described 3 prolarval substages in freshwater (l1a–l1c). prolarvae present a slight but visible ontogenetic development in freshwater, during which the yolk sac begins to reduce, the pigmentation increases on the body and in the eyes, and the lenses appear, although the eyes are not functional. prolarvae need to reach the sea in a maximum of 96 h to pursue their development. their transfer in sea water at a salinity of 36.5 induces important morphological modifications (i.e. yolk sac full absorption, appearance of pectoral fins, migration of the eyes in anterolateral position of the head, opening of mouth and anus), enabling the organisms to adapt to their new environment. this marine stage is divided into two substages: l2a corresponding to the organisation of the morphological structures adapted to the marine environment and l2b during which these morphological structures become functional. whether it is in freshwater or sea water, the duration of the substages depends on the water temperature, but is similar for all individuals for a given temperature. key words: larval development; larval morphology; amphidromy; sicyopterus lagocephalus; reunion island introduction migration strategy occurs in some species in response to heterogeneity of environmental conditions (dingle 1996). the transfer of an individual or a population to places where their survival is facilitated (e.g. more important or more accessible food resource) or their reproduction is more favourable (e.g. absence of predator for the offspring) increases the fitness of the individuals, on condition that the benefit for the spe- cies exceeds the migration costs (hinch et al. 2006; metcalfe et al. 2002). migration also favours the col- onisation of distant habitats, and thus a wider distri- bution of the species. such migratory strategies are commonly observed for fish populations. however, migration is associated to a strong mor- tality. there also is a risk that the organisms do not find a suitable habitat in time to fulfil their life cycle (jonsson & jonsson 1993). diadromy is a particular kind of migration in which species shift between two radically different correspondence: celine ellien, sorbonne universites, universite pierre et marie curie, umr 7208 (mnhn-cnrs-upmc-ird-uag-ucb), departement milieux et peuplements aquatiques, museum national d’histoire naturelle, 43 rue cuvier, cp26, 75231 paris cedex 05, france. e-mail: celine.ellien@upmc.fr 48 doi: 10.1111/eff.12190 morphological changes observed on sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae environments, namely freshwater and sea water, dur- ing their life cycle. amphidromy, as defined by mcdowall (1988, 1992), is a type of diadromy in which the migration between these two systems is not related to the reproductive event. in tropical insular rivers, the diversity of fish com- munities and then biodiversity rely mainly on amp- hidromous gobies, at least for the caribbean and indo-pacific islands, and most of these species are endemic (lim et al. 2002; keith 2003; marquet et al. 2003; keith et al. 2005; lord & keith 2008; keith & lord 2011). indeed, the amphidromous life cycle is particularly adapted to these environments as it allows colonisation or recolonisation of new habitats, through its dispersive stage. tropical insular rivers constitute highly unstable systems, because of the extreme climatic and hydrological variations they undergo on a seasonal scale (keith 2003; keith et al. 2010). in this context, the rivers are frequently sub- ject to local extinctions of their fauna that are com- pensated larval dispersive stage of amphidromous species (mcdowall 2008). recolonisation through the by sicyopterus lagocephalus (pallas 1770) (teleostei: gobiidae: sicydiinae) belongs to the sicydiinae sub- family, regrouping 110 species and nine genera. all of them are amphidromous and are distributed in tropical or subtropical areas (keith & lord 2011). sicyopterus lagocephalus is an amphidromous goby, characterised by adults living and spawning in fresh- water. after hatching, the prolarvae (or free embryos) drift downstream to the sea, where they transform into more developed larvae which undergo an oce- anic dispersive phase. then, postlarvae return to the rivers where they metamorphose into juveniles (keith et al. 2008; taillebois et al. 2011) and grow to the reproductive adult stage. thus, s. lagocephalus, like all amphidromous species, has to shift twice between freshwater and sea water and that implies great ana- tomical, physiological and behavioural adaptations (valade et al. 2009; iida et al. 2010; ellien et al. 2011). besides their intensive fisheries, at importance regarding their strong contribution to river fauna biodiversity, one of the main interests of sicydiinae species consists in their high economic value. at certain time of the year, some amphidromous gobies are targeted by tradi- tional their postlarval stage, when they migrate back to rivers. they constitute an important source of food for local populations. this is the case in particular in reunion island (mascarene archipelago, indian ocean), where s. lagocephalus is subject to strong although unsustainable harvest. indeed, on account of the complexity of the species life cycle associated to the instability of the river systems, s. lagocephalus juvenile stock and thus reproductive adult stock are highly fragile and show some signs of decline. in this context, the biology and ecology of s. lago- cephalus need to be better understood, to elaborate management and conservation plans, aiming at pre- serving both stocks and biodiversity. ‘bichique’), in reunion island, the freshwater stages of s. lago- cephalus have been studied, especially its postlarval (i.e. juvenile and adult stages (keith et al. 2006, 2008). the prolarval stage, which also takes place in freshwater, and the first larval marine stages have been described too (valade et al. 2009). however, this latter description was incomplete on some aspects. from then on, a rigorous and accurate description of the morphological modifications, cha- racterising the transformation of the prolarvae into larvae during their passage from freshwater to sea water, is required and constitutes the purpose of this study. it is indeed important to know precisely each step of the larval cycle and how it modifies the mor- phology and physiology of the animals. this knowl- edge will also be useful for endocrinological studies, to be able to assess the impact of different hormones on the prolarvae transformation as soon as it begins. moreover, we aim at establishing a temporal refer- ence table of this transformation chronology that would allow determining precisely at which stage of larval development is situated a larva at the time of its observation. material and methods review on biological material in reunion island, s. lagocephalus freshwater stages have been studied for two decades, so that it is well known that adults are rheophilic and live in clear and well-oxygenated waters (keith 2003; keith et al. 2006; teichert et al. 2014). reproduction occurs in rivers, continuously during the year, although it is more intense between january and june, thus coinciding with summer and autumn in the southern hemisphere (delacroix & champeau 1992; hoareau et al. 2007; teichert et al. 2013). eggs are laid as clusters on the undersides of rocks and pebbles. each clutch counts between 5000 and 120,000 small eggs (delacroix & champeau 1992), with an average number of around 30,000 eggs (teic- hert et al. 2013). the male takes care of the clutch the eggs hatch into prolarvae (keith 2003) until 48 h after fertilisation (delacroix & champeau 1992). temperature plays a major role on the survival and development rate of fish larvae. in reunion island, valade et al. (2009) empirically show that prolarvae survival is optimised for temperatures between 20 49 ellien et al. and 23 °c, which correspond to mean daily river temperatures during the main spawning period of s. lagocephalus (i.e. wet season in this tropical region). this austral season is associated with strong rainfalls that induce a more turbulent river flow and then both a better oxygenation of the water and faster currents. a better water oxygenation facilitates the survival of the eggs and increases prolarval health. as for the fast currents, they allow a rapid transport of the prolarvae to the sea. during this transport, prolarvae are not totally pas- sive, even if they are unable to resist the current. they oscillate between the bottom and the surface of the water, by swimming up and sinking down alter- natively. this vertical behaviour has been observed both in the field (keith 2003) and in experimental tanks (ellien et al. 2011), as well as on sicyopterus japonicus prolarvae (iida et al. 2010). this behaviour is supposed to accelerate the transport of the prolar- vae to the sea by increasing the time they spend at the surface where the current flows faster. in reunion island, according to the river length (36 km for the longest) and their flow intensity, pro- larvae tumble down the river in <24 h whatever the altitudinal location of the clutches. experimentally, ellien et al. (2011) assessed that prolarval survival in freshwater do not exceed 96 h. once in the sea, prolarvae undergo the modifica- tions that turn them into planktonic marine larvae. this transition induces food intake, first endogenous with the consumption of yolk sac, and then exoge- nous when the mouth and anus are open (ellien et al. 2011). at sea, larvae are planktonic and plankto- trophic, with their mouth open in terminal position (valade et al. 2009; ellien et al. 2011). in a physio- logical point of view, larval osmoregulation needs to evolve, to enable the organisms born in freshwater to survive in sea water. this transfer from freshwater to sea water is critical and generates a strong mortal- ity, in experimental conditions (ellien et al. 2011). the duration of the marine larval stage of s. lago- cephalus has been estimated by otolith microstruc- tural analysis and lasts 4–9 months (i.e. exactly between 133 and 266 days) (hoareau et al. 2007; lord et al. 2010). such a long dispersive period, along with an important variability in the pelagic lar- val duration (pld) at the annual scale, allows the colonisation of distant habitats and could explain the wide distribution of the species at the indo-pacific scale (keith et al. 2005; lord et al. 2012). at the end of the oceanic dispersive stage, post- larvae gather in large numbers at the mouths of the rivers, as they need to find river systems to fulfil their life cycle (keith 2003). settlement in freshwa- ters occurs by successive waves, function of the lunar cycle and hydrological conditions. a second 50 transformation takes place there, under the control of thyroid hormones, allowing them to adapt again to a freshwater environment, after several months spent at sea. during this metamorphosis, their mouth migrates in subinferior position, and the pelvic fins merge to form a sucker, making the juveniles fit to a benthic herbivorous way of life and enabling them to migrate upstream (taillebois et al. 2011) to settle and reproduce once they have reached the adult stage. valade et al. (2009) described five marine larval stages, observed for s. lagocephalus, without feeding and for a water temperature between 20 and 23 °c. the l1 stage comprises four substages that valade et al. (2009) defined as free embryos: l1a stage defined as larvae at hatching and being the unique freshwater stage of this larval development chronol- ogy. it is characterised by no trace of eye, no sign of jaw, translucent and yolk sac at its maximum size. the following stage, l1b stage, is defined as larvae just arriving at sea, with 0–20 h spent in sea water and is characterised by early eyes (lens present, retina not pigmented), eyes on lateral sides of the head, pos- terior tip of mandible detectable as a prominence below the eye, body not pigmented and beginning of yolk sac absorption. the l1c stage is defined as lar- vae with 20–40 h spent in sea water and is character- ised by lens present and pigment beginning to appear on retina, beginning of the migration of the eyes in anterolateral position of the head, mouth is formed but closed, appearance of pectoral fins and multipli- cation of chromatophores on the body. the l1d stage is defined as larvae with 40–65 h spent in sea water and is characterised by pigmented lens, eyes in ante- rolateral position of the head, mouth open in subinfe- rior position, developed pectoral fins and appearance of chromatophores in the cephalic area. the last stage corresponds to the l2 stage, with larvae spending more than 65 h in sea water and is characterised by an open mouth in terminal position and operating, the ability to intake and digest exogenous food, no more yolk sac, many chromatophores in the cephalic area and along the body and all internal organs in place. sampling protocol for this study, we used data collected during three field surveys: in april 2010, between april and may 2012 and between april and june 2013. in all cases, s. lagocephalus egg clusters were collected in the lower reaches of the langevin river (south-west of reunion island, mascarene archipelago, indian ocean), at three stations located between 600 m and 2 km from the river mouth (fig. 1). alternating between three sampling stations reduces the impact morphological changes observed on sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae fig. 1. location of reunion island in the south-west indian ocean (left). location of the rivers in reunion island (right). black dots in langevin river indicate sampling sites. the collect on s. lagocephalus population, by of enabling a turnover of the clutches at each station. this river is of torrential type, characterised by an average flow of 1.18 m3s  1 (teichert et al. 2014) and an average temperature between 20 and 23 °c (valade et al. 2009). the egg clutches are stuck on the inferior side of the rocks. the rocks that are liable to shelter a clutch show some characteristics: they are heavy (more than 1 kg) and embedded in sand and gravels on the bot- tom of the river, so that they are quite stable in the context of the strong river flow. to collect the egg clutches, we had to turn the rocks over one after the other to find them. the newly laid eggs are white and turn grey when they are ready to hatch; we therefore collected only grey clutches. at each sampling, 3–4 grey clutches were collected. even if one egg cluster produces enough prolarvae to ensure the observations of the different steps of their transformation once in sea water, mix- ing several clutches reduces the risk of failure (e.g. larvae malformation) linked to a genetic problem on one particular clutch. this study aims at describing the prolarval and larval stages and substages, during their transition from freshwater to sea water, and so, a qualitative approach was judged sufficient. more- over, larval density at the time of their transfer from freshwater to sea water does not influence larval development (i.e. the same developmental pattern, the same chronology and the same timing were recorded whatever the initial density) (ellien et al. 2011). for both reasons, the exact quantity of prolar- vae processed for taken into account. this study was not once they were collected, the clutches with their substrate were immediately transferred into two buck- ets filled with the water of the river. this transfer induced immediate hatching of the prolarvae. the prolarvae were transported in the buckets to the laboratory within 3 h after their collect. 51 ellien et al. once in the laboratory, two different protocols were followed, function of the period of the collect. the prolarvae sampled in april 2010 were ran- domly distributed between two 45 l tanks, filled with freshwater (tap water) that was first aerated during 48 h before receiving the prolarvae. bubbling in the tank oxygenates the water and also allows a decrease of the chlorides that are found in tap water in greater concentration than in the river freshwater. the prolar- vae were maintained in these tanks, at an average density of 500 indl  1, during 48 h before starting the experiment. the freshwater of the two tanks was entirely renewed in 24 h, with tap water previously oxygenated during 24 h. the room was not air-condi- tioned, so that the water temperature depended on the air temperature and was on average 26.9 °c. the tanks were located under electric light with a pro- grammed 12 h day/night cycle. to observe the influence of the sea water on the transformation of the prolarvae into marine larvae, the experiment consisted in transferring these prolarvae after 48 h into tanks filled with sea water. the same kind of tanks was used (i.e. 45 l tanks). they were filled with offshore drilling water circulating in open circuit, also passing previously through two degassing columns. aeration took place directly in the tanks. this experiment was undertaken in duplicates, so two tanks of sea water were installed. a control consisting in two tanks (i.e. for the duplicate) filled with tap water previously aerated during 24 h was also installed, to observe the evolution of the prolarvae in strict freshwater. the prolarvae were transferred into the experimental and control tanks simultaneously, that is to say 48 h after their collect. in each tank, the prolarvae density at the beginning of the experiment was 100 indl  1. larvae were not fed during the experiment. during the experiment, the temperatures were on average 26.9 °c for the freshwater and 27.1 °c for the sea water. all tanks were located under the same programmed 12-h day/night cycle. each day, the tanks were cleaned by siphoning off the dead individuals and waste material. ten prolarvae or larvae were randomly sampled every 1 h 30 on a period of 10 h per day and observed under a binocular lens set with a camera (olympus c- 5050; optical zoom x3; olympus ltd, paris). the observation (including the photos) of each group of individuals lasted 10 min at the very most. the indi- viduals were observed alive and not anaesthetised. the prolarvae sampled between april and may 2012 and between april and june 2013 were randomly distributed between two 200-ml beakers (i.e. for the duplicates) filled with sea water, and two 200 ml control beakers (i.e. for the duplicates) filled with freshwater, once laboratory, the egg collect. the prolarvae immediately after in the 52  1. were maintained in the different beakers at a den- sity of 500 indl for these experiments, the sea water was artifi- cially synthesised by diluting the appropriate quantity of special instant ocean salt with freshwater (tap water), thus reproducing the ionic composition of sea water. this salty water was made at the average con- centration of the indian ocean (i.e. 36.5). the obtained salinity was verified with a refractometer (reichert, w2789h, buffalo, ny, usa). the fresh- water used for the control came from a river and was pipe-distributed (used only for field irrigation). it contains fewer chlorides than tap water. the freshwa- ter used for both control (river freshwater) and fabri- cation of sea water (tap water) was previously aerated during 24 h. during the whole time of the experiment, the water was continuously aerated by bubbling in the beakers. the laboratory was air-conditioned, so that water temperature was maintained at 25.0 °c. the the four beakers were placed under electric light with a programmed 15-h/9-h day/night cycle. larvae were not fed during the experiment. fifteen prolarvae or larvae were observed twice a day, with an optical microscope (olympus cx41, optical zoom 940) set with a camera (olympus e5). for all experiments, prolarvae and larvae that have been sampled in the tanks or in the beakers for obser- vation were considered as dead, so that they were not put back in their tank or beaker after observation. results larval development in freshwater in freshwater, the morphological characteristics of the prolarvae show little development, whatever the time spent in this environment, within the 96 h of their observed maximal survival time, leading to the con- clusion that the individuals remain at the prolarval stage as long as they do not reach the sea. similar results were observed by ellien et al. (2011), on the same species. the prolarval stage is identified as l1 stage. at hatching (stage l1a), prolarvae are character- ised by the presence of the yolk sac, which is at its maximum size (around 0.3 mm). pigmentation con- sists in four chromatophores located at the mouth, on the posterior part of the yolk sac, above the digestive tract and between the anus and the caudal fin. eyes are located on lateral sides of the head, and they are not pigmented. there size reaches 0.1 mm on the longer length. mouth and anus are closed. except for the caudal fin, none of the fins a width of are 0.04 mm. the size [i.e. length (tl)] of the finfold presents formed. the total morphological changes observed on sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae fig. 2. sicyopterus lagocephalus prolarva at hatching in freshwater. a: tip of notochord, b: notochord, c: chromatophores, d: otolith, e: eye, f: finfold, g: location of the anus, h: yolk sac, i: oil globule, j: location of the mouth. individuals is always under 2 mm: their size is on average 1.7 mm (tl) (fig. 2). an ontogenetic development, slightly modifying the prolarval morphology, is observed. the yolk sac is partially resorbed (i.e. its size decreases to around 0.26 mm) after 28 h in freshwater at 25.0 °c and after 24 h at 26.9 °c, the oil globule becoming pro- portionally prominent (stage l1b), although the yolk sac is never entirely absorbed even when the prolar- vae die in freshwater. the pigmentation tends to spread horizontally along the digestive tract 24 h after hatching (stage l1b), to reach its maximum extension, although remaining in the shape of starry spots, after 50 h in freshwater at 25.0 °c, and after 48 h at 26.9 °c (stage l1c). the prolarvae remain translucent. the lenses appear after 24 h at 26.9 °c (28 h at 25.0 °c) (stage l1b), and the eye pigmentation increases progressively. they reach their most intense colouration after 48 h in freshwater at 26.9 °c (50 h at 25.0 °c), without being entirely pigmented (l1c). in freshwater (both at 25.0 and 26.9 °c), mouth and anus remain close, whatever the time spent leading to the conclusion that the prolarvae do not feed. fins do not appear, whatever the time spent in freshwater and whatever its temperature. no significant growth of the prolarvae is observed, so that they keep the same length than at hatching, namely nearly 2 mm (tl) (fig. 3, table 1). in the central part of in freshwater, prolarvae show a gregarious behav- iour as soon as they hatch, gathering in columns of high densities their container tanks or beakers). within these columns, they alternatively swim towards the surface and passively sink downwards, in a ‘yo–yo’ movement. this behaviour is observed for both temperatures. (i.e. buckets, larval development in sea water the transfer of prolarvae in tanks or beakers filled with sea water at a salinity of 36.5 induces major morphological modifications, the marine larval stage. this marine larval stage is identified as l2 stage. characterising (a) (c) (b) (d) fig. 3. ontogenetic development of sicyopterus lagocephalus prolarvae in freshwater at 25.0 °c. (a) 4 h after hatching, (b) 22 h after hatching, (c) 28 h after hatching, (d) 50 h after hatching. (a) finfold, (b) yolk sac, (c) chromatophores, (d) eye, (e) tip of notochord. 53 ellien et al. table 1. description of the prolarval characteristics and definition of the freshwater prolarval stages observed for sicyopterus lagocephalus just after hatching and as long as they remain in freshwater. freshwater at 25 °c freshwater at 26.9 °c stage appearance of the posterior tip of mandible, below the eye yolk sac partially resorbed pigmentation begins to extent pigmentation maximum extension appearance of the lenses eyes maximum pigmentation maximum size all prolarvae died 18 h 28 h 24 h 50 h 28 h 50 h 2 mm not recorded 15 h 24 h 24 h 48 h 24 h 48 h 2 mm 96 h l1b l1b l1b l1c l1b l1c l1b-c the first character undergoing a noticeable modifi- cation is the finfold that widens (i.e. its size increases until around 0.1 mm) as soon as the prolarvae are transferred in sea water at 27.1 °c. this modification becomes obvious after 4 h at 25.0 °c. the yolk sac is rapidly absorbed until it consists in the oil globule only, after 22 h in sea water at 25.0 °c and 20 h in sea water at 27.1 °c. pigmentation spreads until it forms an almost con- tinuous line above the digestive tract, after 50 h in sea water at 25.0 °c and after 48 h at 27.1 °c. pig- mentation also progressively extends on the cephalic part, as soon as they are transferred in sea water, to be fully pigmented after 50 h at 25.0 °c and after 48 h at 27.1 °c. eyes progressively migrate in anterolateral position of the head, 26 h after transfer of the prolarvae in sea water at 25.0 °c (after 24 h at 27.1 °c). they are entirely pigmented and functional they are mobile, with prominent lenses) after 50 h at 25.0 °c and after around 40 h at 27.1 °c. (i.e. the mouth migrates in subinferior position of the head. mouth and anus are open after 50 h in sea water at 25.0 °c, and after 48 h at 27.1 °c. the opening of the mouth goes with a morphological modification of the head, which appears more shaped because of the loss of the membrane covering the mouth. in parallel to the opening of the mouth and anus, thickens and peristaltic movements propagate from its anterior to its posterior part, showing that the digestive system is functional. pectoral fin buds appear after 6 h in sea water at 27.1 °c, and a bit more at 25.0 °c, to be entirely developed and functional after 48 h at 27.1 °c. how- ever, this development is slower at 25.0 °c, and after 50 h, the pectoral fins are barely functional. the digestive tract after 50 h at 25.0 °c (respectively 48 h at 27.1 °c), no larval growth is recorded: the larvae remain at a length of nearly 2 mm (tl) (fig. 4, table 2). in sea water, larvae remain in a vertical position, their head orientated downwards, and keep on migrat- ing up and down alternatively. however, they also progressively spend more time horizontally (i.e. up to 50% of their time), after their mouth opens, showing sudden accelerations in their swimming behaviour. the prolarval and larval morphological characteris- tics are identical whether the observations were made in 2010, 2012 or 2013, the only difference being the duration of the transformation that varies according to the water temperature that was higher in 2010 than in 2012 and 2013. (b) (d) (a) (c) 54 fig. 4. morphological development of sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae in sea water at 25.0 °c. (a) 4 h after transfer in sea water, (b) 22 h after transfer, (c) 28 h after transfer, (d) 50 h after transfer. (a) finfold, (b) reduced yolk sac, (c) oil globule, (d) jaw, (e) yolk sac entirely absorbed, with oil globule prominent, (f) opened anus, (g) shaped head that becomes pigmented, (h) pectoral fin buds, (i) chromatophores. morphological changes observed on sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae table 2. description of the marine larval stages observed for sicyopterus lagocephalus after their transfer is sea water, at two distinct temperatures (25 and 27.1 °c). the larval characteristics and definition of sea water at 25 °c sea water at 27.1 °c stage finfold enlargement yolk sac fully resorbed migration of the eyes in anterolateral position of the head pigmentation extended in a continuous line head pigmented eyes pigmented and functional mouth and anus open morphological modification of the head that appears more shaped digestive tract functional appearance of pectoral fins buds pectoral fins fully functional all larvae died 4 h 22 h 26 h 50 h 50 h 50 h 50 h 50 h 50 h 7–8 h +50 h not recorded immediate 20 h 24 h l2a l2a l2a 48 h l2b 48 h 40 h 48 h 48 h 48 h 6 h 48 h 120 h l2b l2b l2b l2b l2b l2a l2b discussion a need for a new description of s. lagocephalus prolarval and larval stages and substages in reunion island, s. lagocephalus freshwater stages have been studied for two decades, for the juvenile and adult stages, but the description of the freshwater prolarval stages and of the first marine larval stages is recent (see valade et al. 2009), although of major importance. however, our own observations of these developmental stages, undertaken repeatedly between 2010 and 2013, revealed some crucial discrepancies with this published description (table 3), highlight- ing that a rigorous and accurate description of the morphological modifications, characterising the trans- formation of the freshwater prolarvae into marine larvae, is required, to understand the physiological changes. indeed, concerning the early development in freshwater, valade et al. (2009) did not see any apparent modi- fication of the prolarval morphology, defining this entire freshwater stage as the prolarval stage, identi- fied as l1a. however, our observations do not lead to the same description. the l1a stage described by valade et al. (2009) corresponds to the prolarval morphology at hatching only, with the dif- ference that valade et al. (2009) did not see any trace of eye, while eyes are well visible in our observations, even if they are translucent (fig. 2, table 3). yamasaki & tachihara (2006) observed the same morphological modifications pattern on stiphodon percnopterygionus (gobiidae: sicydiinae) larvae reared during 1 day in freshwater before their transfer in sea water. these authors observed the presence of lens on newly hatched larvae even if no visible larvae with the eyes were not pigmented and also the presence of melanophores on different parts of the larval body. during this first day in freshwater, slight modifications occur, concerning mostly the size of the yolk sac that decreases with time (yamasaki & tachihara 2006). the authors transferred the larvae in salty water (i.e. salinity of 25) at the end of the first day after hatching, so that further observations of the larvae in freshwater did not occur. iida et al. (2013) described s. japonicus larvae at hatching and noted the presence of unpigmented although visible eyes, a developed yolk sac and unopened mouth. bell (1994) observed larval morphology and devel- opment of sicydium punctatum (gobiidae: sicydii- nae) and described larvae at hatching or recently hatched, at development stages from no eye struc- ture visible to eye with lens and some retinal pig- ments. however, eye structure being rare, the author concluded that this larval stage hatches prematurely or under unusual condition. then, our observations on s. lagocepha- lus prolarvae are in good agreement with these pre- vious descriptions, about the presence of the eyes at hatching, but also on the criterion of pigmentation increasing with time. bell (1994) also showed that after 96 h in freshwater, larval yolk reserves still remained, but decreased in size (from 280 lm in diameter at hatching to 140 lm after 96 h), and jaw structures remained incompletely developed. our observations on s. lagocephalus lead to the same conclusion, namely the occurrence of ontogenetic development occurring in freshwater that slightly modifies prolarval morphology as early as 18 h after hatching in freshwater at 25.0 °c (and 15 h at 26.9 °c) (table 1). these morphological modifica- tions, allowing describing the substages l1b and c, occur in strict freshwater (fig. 3, table 3). as bell (1994) with sicydium punctatum larvae, s. lago- cephalus prolarvae survived up to 96 h in freshwa- ter in our experiments. valade et al. (2009) observed prolarvae in fresh- water tanks during a maximum of 72 h and saw no morphological modification of the prolarvae during this phase. it in observed that we is only after the transfer of prolarvae in sea water that valade et al. (2009) observed the same modifications freshwater (table 3). in particular, according to valade et al. (2009), the yolk sac begins to decrease and the lenses appear, in sea water, 28 h after hatching for a water temperature of 25.0 °c. the posterior tip of the mandible is detectable below the eyes 18 h after hatching. all these modifications are described in valade spent between 0 (i.e. larvae just arriving at sea) and 40 h in sea water. after prolarvae (2009) et al. 55 ellien et al. table 3. summary of the prolarval and larval morphological descriptions found in valade et al. (2009) vs. the new description proposed in this study. the reference stages are indicated beside the corresponding morphological description. the cells in grey indicate the observations made after the transfer of the prolarvae in sea water. previous description (valade et al. 2009) stage new description based on this study no trace of eye no sign of jaw translucent yolk sac at its maximum size early eyes (no lens or lens unpigmented) on lateral sides of the head posterior tip of the mandible detectable as a prominence below eye beginning of yolk sac absorption lens present and pigment beginning to appear on retina beginning of the migration of the eyes in anterolateral position of the head mouth formed but closed appearance of pectoral fins multiplication of chromatophores on the body lens pigmented eyes in anterolateral position of the head mouth open pectoral fins in place yolk sac same size as the eyes appearance of chromatophores in cephalic area lens pigmented mouth well formed open in terminal position and operating ability to intake and digest exogenous food no more yolk sac many chromatophores in the cephalic area and along the body all internal organs in place l1a l1b l1c l1d l2 yolk sac at its maximum size pigmentation reduced to four chromatophores eyes translucent on lateral sides of the head mouth and anus closed no sign of jaw no fin (except caudal fin) yolk sac partially resorbed appearance of the lenses appearance of the posterior tip of the mandible detectable as a prominence below eye pigmentation at its maximum extension eyes maximum pigmentation finfold enlargement yolk sac fully resorbed appearance of pectoral fins buds migration of the eyes in anterolateral position of the head pigmentation extended in a continuous line head pigmented eyes (and lenses) pigmented and functional mouth and anus open and functional digestive tract functional modification of the head that appears more shaped pectoral fins functional stage l1a l1b l1c l2a l2b following our observations, the transfer of prolar- vae in sea water induces important morphological modifications (table 2), justifying the definition of the l2 stage that corresponds to the larval marine stage. within this stage, we define two substages: l2a stage that corresponds to the organisation of the morphological structures allowing the organisms to adapt to their new marine environment (e.g. appear- ance of the pectoral fins buds, migration of the eyes in anterolateral position of the head, finfold enlarge- ment that constitutes the beginning of the fins forma- tion) these morphological structures become functional (e.g. eyes functional, mouth and anus open and pectoral fins functional. . .). the l2b stage is set up two folds later than the l2a stage (table 2). the difference between the l1 and l2 stages is not clearly detailed in valade et al. (2009), so that redundancies occur, for example between the stages l1d and l2 that are both charac- terised by lens pigmented, mouth open in terminal position and chromatophores in the cephalic area. during which stage and l2b the sequence in the morphological modifications characterising the passage from freshwater prolarvae to marine larvae, as described in the present study, reveals to be quite similar in several other studies on sicydiine fish. indeed, iida et al. (2010) observed on s. japonicus larvae transferred in salty water, eye 56 pigmentation, mouth opening and yolk absorption, whatever the salinity of the salty water, whereas these modifications did not occur in freshwater. similarly, yamasaki & tachihara (2006) described the acquisition of the marine characters on stiph- odon percnopterygionus larvae after their transfer in salty water at a salinity of 25, namely appearance of pectoral fins, modification of the body and cephalic pigmentation, opening of the mouth and anus and resorption of the yolk sac. again yamasaki & tachihara (2007) highlighted the same pattern in the morphological modifications undergone by awaous melanocephalus (teleostei: gobiidae) larvae once in salty water (i.e. 50% sea water and 50% freshwater). in reunion island, according to the river length (i.e. 36 km maximum) and the river flow intensity that reaches an average speed of 5 kmh  1 (merigoux et al. 2009; teichert et al. 2014), prolarvae are trans- ported downstream to the sea in <24 h (i.e. in 7 h on average), whatever the clutch location in the rivers. in this study, we observed that prolarvae were able to survive up to 96 h in freshwater, confirming a previ- ous study leading to the same conclusion (ellien et al. 2011). thus, theoretically s. lagocephalus pro- larvae reach the sea before undergoing most of the ontogenetic modifications that occur in freshwater. morphological changes observed on sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae however, it is important to know that these modifica- tions are possible, associated to a survival of 96 h in freshwater, in case a delay in the prolarval down- stream transport occurs (e.g. exsiccation periods downstream of the rivers, dam construction slowing down the river flow intensity). furthermore, even if s. lagocephalus prolarvae show little ontogenetic development in freshwater, they need to reach the sea as fast as possible to pur- sue their development. in particular, eyes are not functional in freshwater, even though the pigmenta- tion increases in 2 days after hatching. this absence of functional eyes and their poor ontogenetic devel- opment makes the prolarvae easy preys, as they seem unable to avoid their predator. then, s. lagocephalus prolarvae need to reach the sea in a narrow temporal scale of 4 days, at a water temperature ranging from 20 to 26.9 °c, otherwise they die, probably of physi- ological causes (i.e. osmoregulation). their yolk sac being still present, even though partially resorbed, starvation does not seem to be a mortality factor. influence of water temperature on prolarval and larval development temperature is known to influence larval develop- ment of many teleosts on which it has been studied (see in particular for sicydiine fish: iida et al. 2010; valade et al. 2009). the warmer the temperature, the faster the development. our present study confirms this observation, as we have shown that at a higher temperature, the morphological modifications of s. lagocephalus prolarvae and larvae take place faster than at a cooler temperature, in freshwater (25.0 °c vs. 26.9 °c) as well as in sea water (25.0 °c vs. 27.1 °c). however, whatever the temperature, the development of s. lagocephalus prolarvae in fresh- water and their transformation into marine larvae fol- low the same pattern and the same chronology, with a delay of few hours in the timing of appearance of the characteristic structures, when the temperature is cooler of 2 °c. similarly borges et al. (2003) have shown that embryonic development of the gobiidae gobius paganellus lasted 9–10 days at a temperature of 18.5–20 °c and 10–11 days at a temperature of 15–16.5 °c, yet conserving the same sequence of development between the temperature ranges. iida et al. (2010) observed also the same influence of temperature on larval development for the sicydiinae s. japonicus, with higher temperatures allowing fas- ter development. for s. lagocephalus, valade et al. (2009) highlighted that sea water temperature has an influence on larval development which is faster at 26 °c than at 22 °c, even if the sequence of embry- onic development remains similar between tempera- tures. all these studies converge towards the same observations concerning the influence of temperature on diadromous fish larvae development. indeed, temperature is known to act on metabo- lism, by accelerating it when temperature is higher. the results of our study are in good agreement with this theory. in reunion island, the water temperature in the langevin river, where the clutches were col- lected, ranges between 20 and 23 °c during the main reproduction period (i.e. january to june), thus lower than the temperatures tested during our experiments. then, we can assume that prolarval development is in these natural conditions than what we slower observed experimentally. however, freshwater temperature between 20 and 23 °c, valade et al. (2009) observed, for s. lagocephalus prolarvae, a maximum survival duration between 3 and 4 days, that is to say not different from what we observed for prolarvae in freshwater at 26.9 °c (96 h). then, if prolarval development is slowed down in colder tem- perature, their survival does not seem significantly improved. for conclusion this study proposes a rigorous and accurate descrip- tion of the morphological modifications, characteris- ing the transformation of the prolarvae into larvae during their passage from freshwater to sea water, according to different temperatures in freshwater as well as in sea water. the main observations are in good agreement with previous studies on amphidrom- ous gobies in other regions (e.g. yamasaki & tachi- hara 2006; iida et al. 2010) concerning the prolarvae developmental stage at hatching as well as the early developmental sequence in freshwater. in all cases, sicydiinae species are characterised by poorly devel- oped freshwater prolarval stages. even if s. lago- visible cephalus ontogenetic development in freshwater, they need to reach the sea in a narrow temporal scale of 4 days, at a water temperature ranging from 20 to 26.9 °c, to pursue their development, otherwise they die proba- bly of physiological causes (i.e. osmoregulation). in this context, any obstacle in the river/sea corridor (e.g. exsiccation periods, construction of dams. . .) delaying their arrival at sea is lethal for the prolarvae and prejudicial for the wealth of the stock, already damaged by overfishing on recruiting postlarvae. prolarvae show a poor but acknowledgements the authors would like to thank national museum of natural history of paris (departement milieux et peuplements aqua- tiques) and umr borea 7208 for financial support of this work. we also thank the staff of arda (association reuni- onnaise pour le developpement de l’aquaculture) for their 57 ellien et al. logistic help in terms of material as well as human support during the sampling work. the authors want to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their comments that helped improve the manuscript. a special thank is addressed to clara lord for the rereading of the manuscript. references bell, k.n.i. 1994. life cycle, early life history, fisheries and recruitment dynamics of diadromous gobies of dominica, w.i., emphasising sicydium punctatum perugia. phd thesis, biology department, memorial university of newfound- land. 275 pp. borges, r., faria, c., gil, f., goncßalves, e.j. & almada, v.c. 2003. embryonic and larval development of gobius paga- nellus (pisces: gobiidae). journal of the marine biological association of the uk 83: 1151–1156. delacroix, p. & champeau, a. 1992. ponte en eau douce de sicyopterus lagocephalus (pallas), poisson gobiidae amphibionte des rivieres de la reunion. hydroecologie appliquee 4: 49–63. dingle, h. 1996. migration: the biology of life on the move. oxford: oxford university press us. 474 pp. ellien, c., valade, p., bosmans, j., taillebois, l., teichert, n. & keith, p. 2011. influence of salinity on larval develop- ment of sicyopterus lagocephalus (pallas, 1770) (gobioi- dei). cybium 35: 381–390. hinch, s.g., cooke, s.j., healey, m.c. & farrel, a.p. 2006. behavioural physiology of fish migrations: salmon as a model approach. in: saloman, k.a., wilson, r.w. & bal- shine, s., eds. behaviour and physiology of fish. san diego, ca: elsevier, pp. 239–295. hoareau, t., lecomte-finiger, r., grondin, h., conand, c. & berrebi, p. 2007. oceanic larval life of la reunion “bichi- ques” amphidromous gobiid post-larvae. marine ecology progress series 333: 303–308. iida, m., watanabe, s., yamada, y., lord, c., keith, p. & tsukamoto, k. 2010. survival and behavioral characteris- tics of amphidromous goby larvae of sicyopterus japoni- cus (tanaka, 1909) during their downstream migration. journal of experimental marine biology and ecology 383: 17–22. iida, m., watanabe, s. & tsukamoto, k. 2013. riverine life history of the amphidromous goby sicyopterus japonicus (gobiidae: sicydiinae) in the ota river, wakayama, japan. environmental biology of fishes 96: 645–660. jonsson, b. & jonsson, n. 1993. partial migration: niche shift versus sexual maturation in fishes. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 3: 348–365. keith, p. 2003. biology and ecology of amphidromous gobii- dae in the indo-pacific and the caribbean regions. journal of fish biology 63: 831–847. keith, p. & lord, c. 2011. tropical freshwater gobies: amp- hidromy as a life-cycle. in: patzner, r.a., van tassel, j.l., kovacic, m. & kapoor, b.g., eds. the biology of gobies. enfield, new hampshire: crc press, science publishers inc., pp. 119–128. keith, p., galewski, t., cattaneo-berrebi, g., hoareau, t. & berrebi, p. 2005. ubiquity of sicyopterus lagocephalus (te- leostei:gobioidei) and phylogeography of the genus sicy- opterus in the indo-pacific area inferred from mitochondrial 58 cytochrome b gene. molecular phylogenetics and evolution 37: 721–732. keith, p., marquet, g., valade, p., bosc, p. & vigneux, e. 2006. atlas des poissons et des crustaces d’eau douce des comores, mascareignes et seychelles. paris: mnhn. 250 pp. keith, p., hoareau, t., lord, c., ah-yane, o., gimmoneau, g., robinet, t. & valade, p. 2008. characterisation of post- larval to juvenile stages, metamorphosis, and recruitment of an amphidromous goby, sicyopterus lagocephalus (pallas, 1767) (teleostei: gobiidae: sicydiinae). marine and fresh- water research 59: 876–889. keith, p., lord, c. & taillebois, l. 2010. sicyopus (smilosicy- opus) pentecost, a new species of freshwater goby from vanuatu and new caledonia (teleostei: gobioidei: sicydii- nae). cybium 34: 303–310. lim, p., meunier, f., keith, p. & no€el, p. 2002. atlas des poissons d’eau douce de la martinique. collection patrimo- ines naturels (51). paris: museum national d’histoire natu- relle. 120 pp. lord, c. & keith, p. 2008. threatened fishes of the world: sicyopterus sarasini weber & de beaufort (gobiidae). envi- ronmental biology of fishes 83: 169–170. lord, c., brun, c., hautecoeur, m. & keith, p. 2010. insights on endemism: comparison of the duration of the marine lar- val phase estimated by otolith microstructural analysis of three amphidromous sicyopterus species (gobioidei: sicy- diinae) from vanuatu and new caledonia. ecology of freshwater fish 19: 26–38. lord, c., lorion, j., dettai, a., watanabe, s., tsukamoto, k., cruaud, c. & keith, p. 2012. phylogeography of three amp- hidromous sicyopterus species (teleostei: gobioidei: sicy- diinae): extensive genetic connectivity with breaks identified at biogeographical barriers. marine ecology progress series 455: 269–285. marquet, g., keith, p. & vigneux, e. 2003. atlas des pois- sons et crustaces d’eau douce de la nouvelle-caledonie. (58). paris: museum collection patrimoines naturels national d’histoire naturelle. 282 pp. mcdowall, r.m. 1988. diadromy in fishes: migrations between freshwater and marine environments. mcdowall, r.m., ed. london: croom helm. 308 pp. mcdowall, r.m. 1992. diadromy: origins and definition of terminology. copeia 1992: 248–251. mcdowall, r.m. 2008. early hatch: a strategy for safe down- stream larval transport in amphidromous gobies. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 19: 1–8. merigoux, s., olivier, j.-m., lagarde, m. & forcellini, m. 2009. conception d’indices de bio-evaluation de la qualite ecologique des rivieres de l’^ıle de la reunion a partir des poissons et macrocrustaces et des invertebres benthiques rapport d’etape provisoire, volet macroinvertebres benthi- ques. septembre 2009. 29 pp. metcalfe, j.d., arnold, g. & mcdowall, r. m. 2002. migra- tion. in: hart, p.j.b. & reynolds, j.d., eds. handbook of fish biology and fisheries, vol. 1: fish biology. oxford: (uk) blackwell publishing, pp. 175–199. taillebois, l., keith, p., valade, p., torres, p., baloche, s., dufour, s. & rousseau, k. 2011. involvement of thyroid hormones in the control of larval metamorphosis in sicy- opterus lagocephalus (teleostei: gobioidei) at the time of morphological changes observed on sicyopterus lagocephalus larvae river recruitement. general and comparative endocrinology 173: 281–288. teichert, n., keith, p., valade, p., richarson, m., metzger, m. & gaudin, p. 2013. breeding pattern and nest guarding in sicyopterus lagocephalus, a widespread amphidromous gobiidae. journal of ethology 31: 239–247. teichert, n., valade, p., lim, p., dauba, f., labonne, j., richarson, m., bosc, p. & gaudin, p. 2014. habitat selec- tion in amphidromous gobiidae of reunion island: sicyopte- rus lagocephalus (pallas, 1770) and cotylopus acutipinnis (guicherot, 1863). environmental biology of fishes 97: 255–266. valade, p., lord, c., grondin, h., bosc, p., taillebois, l., iida, m., tsukamoto, k. & keith, p. 2009. early life history and description of larval stages of an amphidromous goby, sicyopterus lagocephalus (pallas, 1767) (teleostei: gobii- dae: sicydiinae). cybium 33: 309–319. yamasaki, n. & tachihara, k. 2006. reproductive biology and morphology of eggs and larvae of stiphodon per- from collected cnopterygionus okinawa island. ichthyological research 53: 13–18. (gobiidae: sicydiinae) yamasaki, . & tachihara, k. 2007. eggs and larvae of awa- ous melanocephalus (teleostei: gobiidae). ichthyological research 54: 89–91. 59  