ecology of freshwater fish 2016: 25: 318–328 ó 2015 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish the behavioural repertoire of arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus (l.)) in captivity: a case study for testing ethogram completeness and reducing observer effects marta bolgan, joanne o’brien, martin gammell department of life and physical sciences, marine and freshwater research centre, galway-mayo institute of technology, dublin road, galway, ireland accepted for publication november 26, 2014 abstract – in the last 20 years, research has been directed towards possible differences in the mating behaviour of species belonging to the salmonidae family that may reproductively isolate wild populations from escaped hatchery or farmed fish. despite these studies, a detailed description of the overall behavioural repertoire of salmonidae species from wild and farmed environments is still lacking. furthermore, although arctic charr has been described as the most variable between all vertebrate species, possible behavioural plasticity outside of the breeding season has not been widely investigated, and a complete ethogram for arctic charr not in breeding condition is currently unavailable. this study presents the first complete ethogram of captive arctic charr behaviour outside of the breeding season. the completeness of this ethogram was validated based on the behavioural accumulation curves methodology, a reliable and easy to use tool for assessing the best compromise between sampling effort and ethogram completeness. additionally, a new way of presenting an ethogram has been proposed and validated using a dichotomous key to describe behaviour types. this proved to be a more effective operational tool for identifying arctic charr behaviour than the ethogram. the dichotomous key of behaviour led to a significantly less ambiguous identification of behavioural units, thus reducing observer, recording errors and enhancing accuracy. this study therefore represents an effective step forward to a more in-depth and rigorous comparison of arctic charr behavioural adaptation between and within artificial and natural settings. key words: ethogram; dichotomous key of behaviour; behavioural accumulation curves; fish; captivity introduction (salvelinus_alpinus l., 1758) arctic charr is the northernmost freshwater fish with over 50,000 popu- lations recorded worldwide, from scandinavia to iceland, british isles and alps canada, russia, (klemetsen et al. 2003). the native distribution of this salmonidae species matches closely the last gla- ciation in the holarctic (johnson 1980; beddow et al. 1998; klemetsen et al. 2003). arctic charr is there- fore specialised in the extreme as it thrives where no other fish do, such as in freshwaters of the highest northern latitudes (40n°–82n° latitude), the highest altitudes in oberer plenderlesee, (2344 m a.s.l. austria) and of the greatest water depths (up to 220 m depth in loch ness, scotland) (shine et al. 1993; hofer & medgyesy 1997; klemetsen et al. 2003; adams et al. 2010). this large variation of habitats is reflected by high diversity in its genetic constitution and high levels of polymorphism (klemetsen et al. 2003), such that arctic charr has been defined as the most variable of all known vertebrates (adams et al. 2010). regarding the conservation status of wild popula- tions, arctic charr is classified as least concern in the iucn red list (freyhof & kottelat 2008). in europe, arctic charr is not listed as a priority or annex ii species under the eu habitat’s directive correspondence: m. bolgan, department of life and physical sciences, marine and freshwater research centre, galway-mayo institute of technology, dublin road, galway, ireland. e-mail: marta.bolgan@gmail.com 318 doi: 10.1111/eff.12212 countries are disappearing in most (92/43/ecc) and it is therefore not offered direct pro- tection (igoe & hammar 2004). however, popula- tions and european populations have undergone a serious decline (igoe et al. 2003). the main threats to remaining arctic charr populations include water pol- lution, acidification, abstraction, afforestation, compe- tition with nonnative fish species, global warming, exploitation and aquaculture (igoe et al. 2003; win- field et al. 2008). in ireland, for example, approximately one-third (24) of all known native populations (70) are most likely extinct (igoe et al. 2003): arctic charr has therefore been classified as vulnerable in the irish red list of 2011 (king et al. 2011) and is now pro- tected under national legislation. also, a number of lakes with arctic charr also contain either annex i or annex ii species, so the designation of special areas of conservation should impart some protection to the irish resident arctic charr, whose populations are monitored yearly by inland fisheries ireland, the state agency responsible for the protection, manage- ment and conservation of ireland’s inland fisheries and sea angling resources (igoe & hammar 2004; rooney et al. 2014). in the last decades, native wild salmonidae popula- tions have declined worldwide while hatcheries and farming activities have increased (esteve 2005). atlantic salmon (salmo_salar (l., 1758)) entered commercial aquaculture in 1973, and since 1998 its aquaculture biomass exceeded that of wild popula- tions (gross 1998). for this species, escapees from farms raise significant concerns about the genetic and ecological integrity of wild populations (gross 1998). arctic charr farming is not as extensive as that of atlantic salmon; however, it is currently successfully farmed in iceland, canada, sweden, norway, fin- land, estonia, usa (west virginia) and ireland (tho- rarinsdottir 2013). iceland has the biggest production of farmed arctic charr, and this has more than dou- bled in the last decade, passing from around 1300 tonnes in 2004 to up to 3300 tonnes in 2013 (runars- son 2013). during spawning, salmonidae species share com- mon behavioural patterns and courtship signals (este- ve 2005). while females select nesting areas (redds) on gravel beds where they dig a series of depressions for egg incubation (groot 1996; esteve 2005, 2007), males divide their time between competing with other males and courting nesting females (esteve 2005). fine divergence in courtship displays as well as in other behavioural traits can play an important role in sexual isolation between closely related species (tin- bergen 1951; kitano et al. 2007). as a consequence, in the salmonidae family, research has been directed towards possible behavioural differences in mating ethogram of arctic charr in captivity that may reproductively isolate wild populations from escaped hatchery or farmed fish (fleming & gross 1993; fleming et al. 1996; chebanov & riddell 1998; berejikian et al. 2000; fleming & petersson 2001; esteve 2005). although the literature on sal- monidae breeding behaviour is quite extensive (jones 1959; frost 1965; gaudemar & beall 1999; esteve 2005, 2007), a detailed description of the overall behavioural repertoire of species belonging to the salmonidae family, as well as a standard, shared ter- minology in ethograms is still lacking. phenotypic plasticity is a trait subject to natural selection and evolutionary trend (west-eberhard 1989). behavioural plasticity outside of the breeding season has a large impact on activities, which are cru- cial for fish survival, such as feeding (werner et al. 1981; dill 1983; ehlinger 1989a,b, 1990; croy & hughes 1991). for example, in the threespine stickle- back (gasterosteus spp.), behavioural plasticity sig- nificantly affects food searching efficiency (day & macphail 1996). arctic charr shows an enormous phenotypic plasticity in its ecology and biology throughout its natural range (doherty & mccarthy 2004; adams et al. 2010), but possible behavioural plasticity outside of the breeding season has not been widely investigated and a complete ethogram for arc- tic char not in breeding condition is currently unavailable. filling this knowledge gap is the starting point for facilitating phylogenetic, phenotypic and ecological comparisons within the salmonidae family and between arctic charr populations. an ethogram is a set of comprehensive descrip- tions of the behavioural units that characterise the behavioural pattern of an animal species, and it should be the starting point of any ethological study (lehner 1996). there are a number of factors that an ethogram should target, where each behavioural unit should be precisely defined and objectively labelled. behavioural units should also be homogeneous, mutually exclusive and independent of each other (cohn & macphail 1996; martin & bateson 2009). when compiling an ethogram a compromise must be reached between sampling effort and the complete- ness of the catalogue (i.e. the ethogram should be exhaustive) (martin & bateson 2009). behavioural accumulation curves (bac), a methodology that was originally developed for investigating floristic and faunistic inventories completeness (colwell & coddington 1994; gotelli & colwell 2001; dias et al. 2009), are an effective tool for analysing etho- gram completeness. the use of such a standardised methodology allows direct comparison between stud- ies that describe behavioural repertoires and lend rig- our to those comparisons (dias et al. 2009). the scientific study of animal behaviour assumes that observations reflect what animals are actually 319 bolgan et al. doing (marsh & hanlon 2004). several potential observer effects may severely impair the accuracy and precision with which behaviour is addressed (lehner 1996): (i) hawthorne effect: where the visual presence of the observer may influence animal behav- iour; (ii) observer error: caused by many factors, including observer inexperience and poorly defined behavioural units; (iii) observer bias: due to strong conscious or unconscious expectations about the out- come of an experiment; and (iv) recording errors: due to poor (lehner 1996). when compiling an ethogram multiple efforts have to be made both for assessing its completeness and for minimising observer effects. technique and equipment the aims of this paper were to (i) provide the first complete ethogram of arctic charr behaviour in cap- tivity outside of the breeding season; (ii) test the completeness of the ethogram using the bac method (dias et al. 2009); (iii) suggest a new way of present- ing an ethogram, is in the form of a simple dichotomous key of behaviour descriptions (i.e. a key in which each question has two possible answer; osborne 1962); and (iv) test the effectiveness of the dichotomous key of behaviour in enhancing accuracy and precision of the investigation. that materials and methods fish collection and maintenance forty-five arctic charr specimens (24 months old, 25 males, 20 females, average weight 500 g) were pur- chased in april 2013 from the organic aquaculture enterprise stofnfiskur ltd (corandulla, co. galway, ireland). all the forty-five specimens were full sib- ling of the fifth farm generation of originally wild native icelandic population. eggs hatched at sto- fnfiskur ltd on 5 feburary 2011; as fish grew, they were transferred to tanks of various capacities (15 tanks of 1 m3, 10 of 2 m3, 35 of 12 m3, 5 of 140 m3 and 5 of 170 m3 capacity) with an average stocking density of 50 kgm  3 without sex isolation. for the first 6 months after first feeding, photoperiod was 24 h daylight; then, natural photoperiod was allowed. fish were fed daily with fish pellets ‘ephico alpha’ manufactured by biomar in denmark. the same food regime was used in galway-mayo institute of tech- nology (gmit) throughout the duration of the experi- ment. at gmit, fish were kept at the stocking facility of the ‘total energy solutions for sustainable aquacul- ture’ (tessa) project: this consists of an aquaculture recirculating system (ars) of three fibreglass tanks (3600 l in total, 1.4 m diameter and 0.7 m high). fish were provided with well-oxygenated freshwater maintained at 12 °c (tmin = 10.2 °c, tmax = 14 °c) 320 using an external chiller; water chemical parameters (ph, nitrates, nitrites, phosphates and ammonia) were checked on a daily basis. a 14l:10d photoperiod was used from the collection of the fish (april 2013) and for the duration of this study (may 2013). data collection and ethogram preparation to compile the ethogram, arctic charr behaviour was observed in one of the stock tanks of the tessa pro- ject in gmit during may 2013 for a total of 1125 min (equally distributed over the daylight hours) using underwater video recordings. record- ings were obtained in a tank with 10 males and 10 females using an underwater camera (jetview elec- tronics, jfcm26-b) from which output was digitised (pinnacle dazzle dvd recorded plus) and then recorded in.avi format using a personal computer run- ning pinnacle studio v.12. videos were observed on a television (samsung le32b45), and, using an ad libitum sampling (lehner 1996), the ethogram was compiled by the author (m.b.) both in the traditional fashion (i.e. a comprehensive description of named behaviours) and as a simple dichotomous key of behaviours (osborne 1962) (see results section 1 and 2). dichotomous key reliability five behavioural units (swimming, resting, circling, bite attempts and resting with spread fins) were ran- domly selected within the ethogram by the author (m.b.). these were shown to 23 independent observ- ers (ranging from final year undergraduate students to phd students at gmit, galway, ireland). none of these 23 observers were familiar with arctic charr behaviour prior to the experiment. each observer was provided with both tools (i.e. ethogram and dichotomous key of behaviour) and was asked to identify each behavioural unit using only one specific tool. the assignment of the tool to be used for the identification of each behavioural unit was randomised before the experiment by the author (m.b.) between and within observers, resulting in a total of 57 behavioural units identified with the etho- gram and 57 behavioural units with the dichotomous key (23 observers; each observer identified two behavioural units with one tool and three behavioural units with the other tool; total of 57 identifications with each tool). observers were spaced throughout a lecture room, and they were not allowed to speak to each other for the duration of the experiment. each observer was provided with the ethogram, dichoto- mous key of behaviour, a hard copy questionnaire and a watch (used by each student to measure the time taken for each behavioural unit identification). the use of cell phones or personal laptops was not allowed. the author (m.b.) showed one video at a time using a projector connected to a personal com- puter. each video depicted one of the five randomly selected behavioural units, and the next video was shown only when all the undergraduate observers had identified the behavioural unit. phd student observers also carried out the experiment using the same videos and tools (ethogram, dichotomous key and questionnaire) but in isolation one from each other and using personal computers. for each behavioural unit identified, observers were asked to fill in a short questionnaire in which they indicated: (i) the tool used; (ii) the name of the identified behavioural unit; identifying behaviours; and (iv) how often they had to read the same passage and/or start again (ranked on a scale from 0 = never to 4 = often). at the end of the experiment, observers were asked to answer a direct question regarding which tool they found easier to use. the time spent (iii) statistical analyses on the results of the question- naire were performed using the statistical package statistica 8 (statsoft, dell). nonparametric sta- tistics were used because assumptions for parametric tests were not met (data were ordinal and non-nor- mal; shapiro test, p = 0.00). comparisons between the ethogram and the dichot- omous key reliability were made with the mann– whitney u-test (two tailed; alpha level of 0.05). is the ethogram exhaustive? bac analysis an instantaneous sampling (lehner 1996) on a time grid of 2 min (n = 376) was carried out on 752 min of underwater video recordings, collected as previously described. all video recordings were observed on a television (samsung le32b45): the occurrence of all behavioural units (as defined in the ethogram) performed by the fish framed by the camera was scored every two minutes on a previ- ously prepared ad hoc matrix using a personal computer. in particular, data were entered in a matrix in which the rows represented the observed behavioural units (scored as 1 for presence and 0 for absence) and the columns represented the sam- pling units. this matrix was then loaded onto esti- mates, a free software application for windows and macintosh available at http://viceroy.eeb.uconn. edu/ estimates (colwell 2006). estimates allows for calculating the mean number of new behavio- ural activities observed for each sampling unit (2 min) accumulated up to the total sample size. the accumulation curves to prevent being affected by temporal biases in sampling effort, data were randomised. the form of ethogram of arctic charr in captivity results arctic charr ethogram locomotion swimming: to move from one point to another, the fish resorts to a subcarangiform locomotion (moyle & cech 2004). this type of locomotion involves the rhythmic undulations of the rear part of the body accompanied by rhythmic beats of the caudal fin. to equilibrate the body in the water column the pectoral fins may be spread. emphasised swimming: similar to swimming, but in this case, the body and tail movements are more conspicuous and fast. swimming in place: fish continuously undulates the rear part of the body and rhythmically beats the caudal fin; pectoral fins may undulate at the same time as the tail beats. this does not result in any change of position: the fish always maintains its posi- tion at the same point of the water column, usually against the water flow. sprint: a fish that is swimming instantly increases its swimming speed as a result of more conspicuous tail beats. glide: with spread pectoral fins, fish moves slowly in the water column without changing directions as a result of slow and relatively low-intensity pectoral fin quivers. change direction: while swimming, thanks to a vigorous tail shake, the fish changes direction. stationary positions resting: the fish is in a stationary position, usually on the bottom, but sometimes, this behavioural unit occurs even in the water column. movement is not detectable. pectoral fins are close to the body. resting with spread fins: this behaviour is similar to resting, but in this case, pectoral fins are spread or the fish is settled with the tips of the pectoral fins touching the bottom. low-intensity quivering: the fish is in resting position close to the bottom, and it quivers the pectoral fins continuously with a relatively low repetition rate. quivering: the fish is in resting position close to the bottom, and it quivers the pectoral fins continu- ously with a relatively fast repetition rate. in this case, the body also quivers slightly. quivering with tail movements: this behaviour is similar to quivering, but in this case, the fish moves the tail too. tail beats are relatively low in intensity and in repetition rate. quivering in the water column: this behaviour is similar to quivering but is performed in the water column. 321 bolgan et al. resting with tail movements: similar to swimming in place, but in this case, the tail beats are less vigor- ous and occur with a really low repetition rate (at maximum one tail beat every 2 s). in contrast with the swimming in place behaviour, in this case, the tail moves in an approximately circular pattern. social interactions and display showing the belly: the fish, close to the bottom, turns upside down: the belly is facing the surface, and the body is shaken by continuous and vigorous oscillations from the pelvic fins to the tail. then, the fish turns in a normal position (dorsal fin facing the surface) and after a very short period (up to 1 s) the fish turns upside down again, repeating this pattern up to 3 or 4 times. circling: two individuals swim in a circular pat- tern, one following the other’s tail from a very short distance. swimming is relatively slow. approach with quivering: when two fish are rest- ing close to each other (i.e. <1 body length apart), one approaches the other while quivering the pectoral fins. the approach is slow: the propulsion is given by the energy of quivering. shakes: when two fish are resting close to each other (i.e. <1 body length apart), one starts to rapidly shake the body from tail to pelvic fins with a rela- tively fast repetition rate. chasing: two individuals swim together, but not in a circular pattern, one following the other’s tail from a very short distance. swimming is rapid and the mouth of the chaser is very close to the tail of the chased fish. bite attempt: two individuals are performing either the swimming in a circle or the chasing behaviour. the follower approaches the flank of the followed fish and attempts a bite. this behaviour can be repeated more than once if the followed individual does not rapidly escape. escape: one fish swims rapidly away from a con- specific, as a result of strong movements of the tail, the pectoral fins and the body, in any direction that can provide an escape route. pushing: an individual approaches another individ- ual who is in a resting position. the approaching individual forces the other to move by pushing with the snout on the other individual’s flank. feeding prefeeding: before the feeding behaviours are per- formed, probably elicited from visual or chemical food stimulation, the fish starts to convulsively shake the entire body, from the pelvic fins to the tail. feeding in the water column: the fish eats the food on the surface or in the water column. the approach 322 to food is relatively fast, and the fish usually swims towards the food while it sinks in the water column. feeding on the bottom: the fish eats the food on the bottom. the approach to the food is slower than in the feeding in the water column behaviour. the fish approaches the food from an upper position, the fish body is at an angle, with the mouth on the bot- tom grabbing the food and the tail in the water col- umn. the fish may repeat this behaviour to eat a second particle of food: rarely, it eats several food particles in the same sequence. dichotomous key of arctic charr behaviour the first step necessary when using the dichotomous key is to decide to which of the subsequent groups (a, b or c) the observed behaviour belongs. once the group is identified, the next step is to follow the identification instructions and steps of the dichoto- mous key. for a detailed description of the behavio- ural units identified, the ethogram may be consulted. group a: the behaviour is not performed towards/ with other individuals; go to step 1. group b: food is involved in the performance of the observed behaviour; go to point 13. group c: the behaviour involves more than one individual (i.e. social behaviour). social behaviours also include those behaviours that are performed by one individual, but they are oriented towards another (e.g. visual display); go to step 15. 1. (group a) the fish moves from one point another in the water; go to step 2. to the fish is always at the same point of the water column or it is always at the same point on the bottom; go to step 6. 2. (1) body movements are detectable; go to step 3. body movements are not detectable; glide. 3. (2) fish is moving with a constant speed; go to step 4. fish is moving with a clearly detectable accelera- tion pattern; sprint. 4. (3) fish body movements appear proportionate to the activity it is performing (i.e. no emphasised movements are detectable); go to step 5. fish body movements are emphasised; emphas- ised swimming. 5. (4) while the fish is moving, it maintains the same direction; swimming. while the fish is moving, it changes direction; change direction. 6. (1) body movements are not detectable; go to step 7. body movements are detectable; go to step 8. 7. (6) the pectoral fins are close to the fish body; resting. the pectoral fins are spread; resting with spread fins. 8. (6) the main movements are performed by the tail; go to step 9. the main movements are performed by the pec- toral fins; go to step 10. 9. (8) fast and vigorous tail beats; swimming in place. slow tail beats; resting with tail move- ments. 10. (8) tail is moving; quivering with tail movements. tail is not moving; go to step 11. 11. (10) the behaviour is performed in the water col- umn; quivering in the water column. the behaviour is performed on the bottom; go to step 12. 12. (11) fast beats of the pectoral fins; quivering. slow beats of the pectoral fins; low-inten- sity quivering. 13. (group b) the fish takes food; go to step 14. the fish does not take food; prefeeding. 14. (13) the behaviour is performed in the water col- umn; feeding in the water column. the behaviour feeding on the bottom. is performed on the bottom; 15. (group c) the behaviour involves swimming; go to step 16. the behaviour does not involve swimming; go to step 19. 16. (15) the fish is swimming in a circular pattern; circling. the fish is not swimming in a circular pattern; go to step 17. 17. (16) the individual observed is chased a short distance by another; escape the individual observed is chasing another; go to step 18 ethogram of arctic charr in captivity 18. (17) bite attempt; bite attempt no bite attempt; chasing 19. (15) a physical contact between two individuals is detectable; pushing. no physical contact is detectable; go to step 20. 20. (19) the behaviour is directed towards another individual; approach with quiver. the visual display or the behaviour is not direc- ted towards another individual; go to step 21. 21. (20) the dorsal fin is always facing the water surface; shakes. the fish belly is facing the water surface for at least a fraction of the behavioural unit; show- ing the belly. dichotomous key reliability neither of the two proposed tools for the identification of arctic charr behaviours (i.e. ethogram and dichoto- mous key) lead to faster identification of one behavio- ural unit (n = 57; u = 1521; p = 0.55). on average, the time taken to identify a behaviour was the same between the two methodological tools used (ethogram: mean = 2.16 min; min = 1 min; max = 5 min; sd = 0.9. dichotomous key: mean = 2.13 min; min = 1 min; max = 4 min; sd = 1.0). results showed no significant difference in the fre- quency with which an observer had to read the same passage twice and/or start again between the two tools (n = 57; u = 1596; p = 0.86). significant results were found when comparing the preference for one specific tool; in particular, 65% of the observers preferred to rely on the dichotomous key of behaviour rather than on the ethogram, consid- ering it less ambiguous and easier to use (n = 23; u = 184; p = 0.04). furthermore, the dichotomous key of behaviour allowed a more precise identification of the behavio- ural units: 87% of the behaviours were correctly identified with the dichotomous key while only 61% were correctly identified using the ethogram (n = 57; u = 119; p = 0.01). is the ethogram exhaustive? as expected, the number of new behavioural units observed decreased progressively with increasing sampling effort (fig. 1). during the 376 2-minute samples, units were observed: data fitted well with the clench model’s function, giving an estimated asymptotic repertoire behavioural different 24 323 bolgan et al. size of 24.74 (a = 2.59; b = 0.10). therefore, the observed proportion of repertoire was 96.9%. this means that the ethogram here presented is representative of the behaviour of arctic charr in captivity (at least from the population and for the set- ting used in this study). the total discussion the represent starting point of ethograms any behavioural study, and they should include all the behaviours of the species observed (lehner 1996; dawkins 2009; martin & bateson 2009). however, ethograms are often generated from an operative per- spective, presenting the fractions of the behavioural pattern of an animal species on which further research will be focused (martin & bateson 2009). often ethograms are related to the setting in which animals are observed, that is artificial or natural set- ting. prior to this study, an ethogram of arctic charr behaviour outside of the breeding season was not available for both wild and captive populations. we present the behavioural units observed in arctic charr when in a farmed setting and outside of the breeding season (i.e. the most typical situation in a farm). considering that an accurate behavioural description is a prerequi- site for behavioural comparison, this ethogram may serve as a starting point for comparing captive behav- iour of closely related salmonidae species or for comparing arctic charr behaviour within and between wild and farmed settings. this is especially important when searching for behavioural differences that may the first ethogram, inclusive of all contribute to reproductive isolation of wild and escaped populations. low levels. finally, presently, a comparison with the behaviour of in breeding other salmonidae species when not conditions is difficult to achieve considering the knowledge gaps in such work. however, circling is a well-described behavioural unit occurring in salmoni- dae during the breeding season (berst et al. 1981; esteve 2005) and it is interesting to note that this behaviour occurs even in artificial settings when water and light parameters are different to those dur- ing the breeding season and when stock density is maintained at the ethogram presented in this paper was generated by observing arctic charr specimens housed at low stock density (10 kgm  3). however, stock density in commercial farms can be variable and this has been demonstrated to affect fish behaviour (jørgensen et al. 1993). in particular, arctic charr suffer less physical damage and grow more rapidly at high-density rates (i.e. 120 kgm  3) and furthermore, following jørgensen et al. (1993), schooling behaviour does not occur in low-density setting (i.e. 15 kgm  3). schooling behaviour was never noticed during the present study. considering that backstr€om et al. (2014) dem- onstrated a connection between arctic char captive behaviour and stress responsiveness, further investi- gation on qualitative differences in arctic charr behaviour when housed at different stocking densities could therefore help to reduce stress and maximise fish welfare in captivity. considering that animal behaviour can be defined as a continuous stream of actions (martin & bateson s t i n u l i a r u o v a h e b f o r e b m u n 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 –50 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 number of 2 min samples fig. 1. behavioural accumulation curve of arctic charr behaviour in captivity outside the breeding season obtained with a total of 376 instantaneous samples taken every 2 min. 324 proving therefore, 2009), researchers have to divide this stream into independent and well-defined units to measure it. one of the most challenging aspects of creating an ethogram is the assessment of the ethogram com- pleteness. the behavioural accumulation curve methodology demonstrates that the ethogram pre- sented here covers approximately 96% of the total- behavioural repertoire of arctic charr; it should be noted that there may still be some behaviours missing from the ethogram. for example, although we observed bite attempts, the occurrence of a bite was never observed. the present study sup- ports the conclusion and methodology of dias et al. (2009) that behavioural accumulation curves are a reliable and easy to use tool for assess- ing the best compromise between sampling effort and ethogram completeness. the completeness of the arctic charr ethogram has been reached with a smal- ler sampling effort than the one of dias et al. (2009), probably due to a smaller resolution and a less com- plex behavioural pattern of the species observed therefore, even though behavioural accumulation curves represent a tool for interspecific comparison, their output appears to be strongly species and setting dependant. however, the use of such a standardised methodology could lend rigour to the comparison between studies that describe behavioural repertoires of arctic charr in natural or artificial settings or between closely related species. in farming situations, more than one operator can be devoted to the fish welfare control, which is of finally, a new way of presenting an ethogram was proposed and validated during the present study. the dichotomous key of behaviour significantly reduced both observer and recording errors, leading to a more rigorous identification of the observed behaviours, even when the observers had little or no experience in ani- mal behaviour observations. observer error is due to many factors, including poor observer experience and badly designed tools for animal identification (lehner 1996). providing better designed tools is advantageous when observers are not experts in scientific terminol- ogy and methodology for animal behaviour investiga- tions. observer error the possible observer effects causing incorrect identification of ani- mal behaviour (lehner 1996; dawkins 2009). other sources of within observer imprecision are observer bias and the hawthorne effect (lehner 1996). further- more, to reduce the variability with which different observers identify the same behaviour (lehner 1996; dawkins 2009; martin & bateson 2009; burghardt et al. 2012). different measures are devised to minimise as many sources as possible of variability and error in animal behaviour investigations (observer effects and interobserver reliability) and should be therefore adopted whenever possible. is just one of is important it ethogram of arctic charr in captivity is fundamental importance to guarantee fish health and stress avoidance and to maximise production (hun- tingford 2004). in these contexts, behavioural shifts are often the first indicator of different kinds of stres- sors acting on the animals. operators usually use a behavioural listing score, in which the incidences of abnormal behaviours, such as stereotypic behaviour, inappropriate time budgeting or the occurrence of atypical behaviour, are all parameters to be measured (wolfensohn & lloyd 2013). the first step for the operator to correctly identify the behaviour observed: once the behaviour is properly identified, shifts from the normal pattern can be noticed and, if necessary, welfare measures can be rapidly put in place. in such contexts, considering that behavioural analysis can be complex, the possibility of correctly identifying a behavioural occurrence has to be maxi- mised (wolfensohn & lloyd 2013) and several mea- sures can be proposed to achieve this goal. providing operators with better designed tools represents one of the most important solutions to this problem. the use of better tools will reduce the possibility of observer and recording errors, and at the same time, enhances interobserver reliability (lehner 1996). the dichoto- mous key of behaviour has proved to be an effective and less ambiguous tool for addressing animal behav- iour than behavioural catalogues, and the one pro- posed in this paper, in particular, could be used as a baseline for checking healthy conditions in low-den- sity farmed populations of arctic charr. furthermore, because observer and recording errors may be corre- lated with the number of behavioural units in an etho- gram (lehner 1996) to further reduce errors, some behavioural units in the ethogram we have presented could be classified as different subunits, or intensity levels, of the same behaviour. in particular, swim- ming and emphasised swimming could be considered as two different intensities of the behaviour swim- ming. additionally, low-intensity quivering, quiver- ing with tail movements, quivering in the water column and quivering could be consider as different intensities of the behaviour quivering. finally, feed- ing in the water column and feeding on the bottom could be considered as different subunits of the behaviour feeding. however, the current ethogram proved to lead to 61% positive identification of behavioural units, increasing up to 87% when using the dichotomous key, even for naive observers. finally, in the case in which behavioural observa- tions are part of the welfare monitoring measures in farm settings, a proper training of operators is recom- mended in order (i) to further reduce observer errors and (ii) to increase interobserver reliability. to avoid the possibility of observer bias, on the contrary, a self-conscious effort has to be enforced by each oper- ator to limit as much as possible the expectations 325 bolgan et al. about the output of the observations. furthermore, the tool provided should not leave space for observer interpretation. in the case where animals have been exposed to different treatments, observer bias could be minimised due to ‘blind’ observation, that is the observer is not aware of which treatment the animals have received (lehner 1996; dawkins 2009; burg- hardt et al. 2012). finally, behavioural observations on video recordings rather than direct observation of the animals are recommended for several reasons (i) to avoid hawthorne effects (lehner 1996); (ii) to fur- ther reduce observer errors especially in naive observers, where there is a possibility of observing the recorded behaviours more than once; and (iii) to reduce recording errors. burghardt et al. (2012) reviewed several hundred published articles from 1970 to 2010 in five leading animal behaviour journals and found that <10% of the articles reviewed adopted measures to reduce observer bias and to enanche interobserver reliability. good practise measures in this situation include (i) prioritis- ing the possibility of collecting data blind with regard to comparison group (i.e. avoid observer bias); (ii) having at least one co-author or other trained investigator to independently code a subset of the data collected for interobserver reliability measures; and (iii) reporting clearly in the manuscripts methods and⁄ or reliability measures (burghardt et al. 2012) in conclusion, we have presented the first complete qualitative description of low-density captive arctic charr behaviour when not in breeding season. we have further validated ethogram completeness, and we have designed it in a fashion which minimises observer and recording errors and increases interobserver reliability. previous research has shown that the conditions for arctic charr sympatric divergence occur in the wild, where individual niche specialisation drives the gen- eration of phenotypic variation and ontogenetic pro- cesses can play a part in the early stages of speciation (adams et al. 2010). considering that behavioural plasticity outside of the breeding season has not been widely investigated in arctic char, the description of its behaviour in different wild and cap- tive conditions could provide important insights in understanding the process of sympatric divergence, also from a conservation perspective. this study therefore represents the first step in fill- ing in this knowledge gap, and it may be considered as a starting point for facilitating phylogenetic, phe- notypic and ecological comparisons between arctic charr populations and within the salmonidae family. acknowledgements authors are immensely grateful to (i) the irish research coun- cil, which funded the present study (goipg/213/679); (ii) 326 laurentiu dimache, responsible for the fish holding facility in gmit (this system was built as part of the ‘total energy solutions for sustainable aquaculture’ project funded by the irish department of education technological sector research (strand iii) programme and the irish sea fisheries board); (iii) brian healy of the eu certified organic aquaculture enterprise stofnfiskur ireland ltd, bunnatubber, corrandulla, co. galway (stofnfiskur@eircom.net) for providing the experi- mental animals and for the assistance throughout the study; (iv) dr. ian j. winfield and dr. marta picciulin for the invalu- able improvements and suggestions provided on the manu- script; (v) all the undergraduates and phd students that took part in the experiments; and (vi) an anonymous reviewer for the constructive comments on this manuscript. references adams, c., br€ann€as, e., dempson, b., knudsen, r., mccar- thy, i., power, m. & winfield, i. 2010. a perspective on salvelinus research. hydrobiologia 650: 1–2. backstr€om, t., br€ann€as, e., nilsson, j. & magnhagen, c. 2014. behaviour, physiology and carotenoid pigmentation in arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus. journal of fish biology 84: 1–9. beddow, t.a., deary, c. & mckinley, r.s. 1998. migratory and reproductive activity of radio-tagged arctic charr (salvelinus alpi- nus l.) in northern labrador. hydrobiologia 371: 249–262. berejikian, b.a., tezak, e.p. & larae, l. 2000. female mate choice and spawning behaviour of chinook salmon under experimental conditions. journal of fish biology 57: 647– 661. berst, a.h., emery, a.r. & spangler, g.r. 1981. reproduc- tive behavior of hybrid charr (salvelinus_fontinalis x s. na- maycush). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 38: 432–440. burghardt, g.m., bartmess-levasseur, j.n., browning, s.a., mor- rison, k.e., stec, c.l., zachau, c.e. & freeberg, t.m. 2012. per- spectives-minimizing observer bias in behavioral studies: a review and recommendations. ethology 118: 511–517. chebanov, n.a. & riddell, b.e. 1998. the spawning behav- ior, selection of mates, and reproductive success of chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha) spawners of natural and hatchery origins under conditions of joint spawning. journal of ichthyology 38: 517–526. cohn, j. & macphail, r.c. 1996. ethological and experimen- tal approaches to behavior analysis: implications for ecotoxi- cology. environmental health perspectives 104: 299–305. colwell, r.k. 2006. estimates: statistical estimation of spe- cies richness and shared species from samples. version 8. available at: http://viceroy.eeb.uconn.edu/estimates. colwell, r.k. & coddington, j.a. 1994. estimating terrestrial biodiversity through extrapolation. proceedings of the royal society of london. series b: biological sciences 345: 101– 118. croy, m.i. & hughes, r.n. 1991. the role of learning and mem- ory in the feeding behaviour of the fifteen-spined stickleback, spinachia spinachia l. animal behaviour 41: 149–159. dawkins, m.s. 2009. observing animal behaviour. design and analysis of quantitative data. oxford: oxford university press. 155 pp. day, t. & macphail, j.d. 1996. the effect of behavioural and morphological plasticity on foraging efficiency in the three- spine stickleback (gasterosteus sp.). oecologia 108: 380– 388. dias, p.a.d., rangel-negrin, a., coyohua-fuentes, a. & ca- nales-espinosa, d. 2009. behaviour accumulation curves: a method to study the completeness of behavioural repertoires. animal behaviour 77: 1551–1553. dill, l. 1983. adaptive flexibility in the foraging behaviour of fishes. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 40: 398–408. doherty, d. & mccarthy, t.k. 2004. morphometric and meristic characteristics analyses of two western irish popula- tions of arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus (l.). biology & environment proceedings of the royal irish academy 104: 75–85. ehlinger, t.j. 1989a. learning and individual variation in bluegill foraging: habitat-specific techniques. animal behav- iour 38: 643–658. ehlinger, t.j. 1989b. foraging mode switches in the golden shiner (notemigonus crysoleucas). canadian journal of fish- eries and aquatic sciences 46: 1250–1254. ehlinger, t.j. 1990. habitat choice and phenotype-limited feeding efficiency in bluegill: individual differences and tro- phic polymorphism. ecology 71: 886–896. esteve, m. 2005. observations of spawning behaviour in sal- moninae: salmo, oncorhynchus and salvelinus. review of fishery biology of fish 15: 1–21. esteve, m. 2007. two examples of fixed behavioural patterns in salmonines: female false spawning and male digging. journal of ethology 25: 63–70. fleming, i.a. & gross, m.r. 1993. breeding success of hatch- ery and wild coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) in com- petition. ecological applications 3: 230–245. fleming, i.a. & petersson, e. 2001. the ability of released, hatchery salmonids to breed and contribute to the natural productivity of wild populations. nordic journal of freshwa- ter resources 75: 71–98. fleming, i.a., jonsson, b., gross, m.r. & lamberg, a. 1996. an experimental study of the reproductive behaviour and success of farmed and wild atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). journal of applied ecology 33: 893–905. freyhof, j. & kottelat, m. 2008. salvelinus_alpinus. the iucn red list of threatened species. version 2014.1. frost, w.e. 1965. breeding habits of windermere charr, salv- elinus willughbii (gunther), and their bearing on speciation of these fish. proceedings of the royal society of london. series b: biological sciences 163: 232–284. gaudemar, b. & beall, e. 1999. reproductive behavioural sequences of single pairs of atlantic salmon in an experi- mental stream. animal behaviour 57: 1207–1217. gotelli, n.j. & colwell, r.k. 2001. quantifying biodiversity: procedures and pitfalls in the measurement and comparison of species richness. ecology letters 4: 379–391. groot, c. 1996. salmonid life histories. in: pennell, w. & bruce, a., eds. principles of salmonid culture. new york: elsevier, pp. 97–230. gross, m.r. 1998. one species with two biologies: atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) in the wild and in aquaculture. cana- dian journal of fishery and aquatic sciences 55: 131–144. ethogram of arctic charr in captivity hofer, r. & medgyesy, n. 1997. growth, reproduction and feeding of dwarf arctic char, salvelinus_alpinus, from an alpine high mountain lake. archiv f€ur hydrobiologie 138: 509–524. huntingford, f.a. 2004. implications of domestication and rearing conditions for the behaviour of cultivated fishes. journal of fish biology 65: 122–142. igoe, f. & hammar, j. 2004. the arctic charr salvelinus alpi- nus (l.) species complex in ireland: a secretive and threa- tened ice age relict. biology & environment proceedings of the royal irish academy 104: 73–92. igoe, f., o’grady, m.f., tierney, d. & fitzmaurice, p. 2003. arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus (l.) in ireland—a millen- nium review of its distribution and status with conservation recommendations. biology & environment proceedings of the royal irish academy 103: 9–22. johnson, l. 1980. the arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus. in: balon, e.k., eds. charrs: salmonid fishes of the genus salv- elinus. the hague, the netherlands: dr junk publishers, pp. 15–98. jones, j.w. 1959. the salmon. london: collins. jørgensen, e.h., christiansen, j.s. & jobling, m. 1993. effects of stocking density on food intake, growth perfor- mance and oxygen consumption in arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus). aquaculture 110: 191–204. king, j.l., marnell, f., kingston, n., rosell, r., boylan, p., caffrey, j.m., fitzpatrick, u., gargan, p.g., kelly, f.l., o’grady, m.f., poole, r., roche, w.k. & cassidy, d. 2011. ireland red list no. 5: amphibians, reptiles & freshwa- ter fish. dublin: national parks and wildlife service: department of arts, heritage and the gaeltacht. kitano, j., mori, s. & peichel, c.l. 2007. divergence of male courtship displays between sympatric forms of anadromous threespine stickleback. behaviour 145: 443–461. klemetsen, a., amundsen, p.a., dempson, j.b., jonsson, b., jonsson, n., o’connell, m.f. & mortensen, e. 2003. atlan- tic salmon salmo_salar l., brown_trout salmo_trutta l. and arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus (l.): a review of aspects of their life histories. ecology of freshwater fish 12: 1–59. lehner, p.n. 1996. handbook of ethological methods, 2nd edn. cambridge: cambridge university press. 665 pp. marsh, d.m. & hanlon, t.j. 2004. observer gender and observation bias in animal behaviour research: experimental tests with red-backed salamanders. animal behaviour 68: 1425–1433. martin, p. & bateson, p. 2009. measuring behaviour. an introductory guide, 3rd edn. cambridge: cambridge univer- sity press. 171 pp. moyle, p.b. & cech, j.j. jr 2004. fishes: an introduction to ichthyology, 5th edn. upper saddle river, usa: person pre- ntice hall. 726 pp. osborne, d.v. 1962. some aspects of the theory of dichoto- mous keys. new phytologist 62: 144–160. rooney, s.m., o’gorman, n.m., cierpial, d. & king, j.j. 2014. national programme: habitats directive and red data book species executive report 2013. dublin: inland fisheries ireland. runarsson, g. 2013. aquaculture in iceland, presentation 22 april 2013. the icelandic aquaculture association. avail- able at: http://lfh.is/documents/china23042013.pdf 327 bolgan et al. shine, a.j., kubecka, j., martin, d.s. & duncan, a. 1993. fish habitats in loch ness. scottish naturalist 105: 237– 255. thorarinsdottir, r.i. 2013. prospects of farming arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus l.). trondheim, norway: aquaculture europe. 217 pp. tinbergen, n. 1951. the study of instinct. oxford: oxford university press. werner, e.e., mittlebach, g.g. & hall, d.j. 1981. the role of foraging profitability and experience in habitat use by blue- gill sunfish. ecology 62: 116–125. west-eberhard, m.j. 1989. phenotypic plasticity and the ori- gins of diversity. annual review of ecology and systemat- ics 20: 249–278. winfield, i.j., fletcher, j.m. & james, j.b. 2008. the arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus) populations of windermere, uk: population trends associated with eutrophication, climate change and increased abundance of roach (rutilus rutilus). environmental biology of fishes 83: 25–35. wolfensohn, s. & lloyd, m. 2013. handbook of laboratory animal management and welfare. oxford university press: wiley-blackwell eds. 363 pp. 328  