ecology of freshwater fish 2004: 13: 77–84 printed in denmark æ all rights reserved copyright ó blackwell munksgaard 2004 ecology of freshwater fish effect of brown_trout body size on post-stocking survival and pike predation hyva¨rinen p, vehanen t. effect of brown_trout body size on post-stocking survival and pike predation. ecology of freshwater fish 2004: 13: 77–84. ó blackwell munksgaard, 2004 p. hyva¨rinen, t. vehanen finnish game and fisheries research institute, kainuu fisheries research and aquaculture, paltamo, finland abstract – a total of 40 (20 age-3 + 20 age-4) radio-tagged hatchery- reared brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.) and 40 wild radio-tagged northern pike (esox lucius l.) were released into a regulated river. age-3 brown_trout were predicted and observed to be highly vulnerable to predation by pike (50% mortality), whereas age-4 brown_trout were predicted and observed to enjoy an almost absolute size refuge from predation (5% mortality). almost half of the ﬁsh from both age groups similarly emigrated and survived from the river within 3 days of release. however, there was a considerable difference in survival between age groups for ﬁsh that remained in the river for a longer period. of these, all except one age-3 brown_trout were eaten by pike, whereas all but one age-4 ﬁsh survived predation. key words: salmo_trutta; esox lucius; predation; body size; telemetry; stocking pekka hyva¨rinen, finnish game and fisheries research institute, kainuu fisheries research and aquaculture, manamansalontie 90, fin-88 300 paltamo, finland; e-mail: pekka.hyvarinen@rktl.ﬁ accepted for publication august 31, 2003 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´ s del texto principal de este articulo. introduction in many finnish water systems used for hydropower production, brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.) nursery areas in rivers have been destroyed, and therefore hatchery- reared smolt-sized (age-2 and 3) lake-run brown_trout have been released into free river areas or into lakes to compensate for the habitat loss. however, the results from stockings have been highly variable (vehanen 1995). angling possibilities have also been improved and maintained by stocking hatchery-reared brown_trout at legally takeable size (over 40 cm in finland). the recapture rate of large brown_trout has generally been high (skurdal et al. 1989) and a positive corre- lation between body size of salmonids at the time of release and recapture rate (skurdal et al. 1989; salm- inen et al. 1995; tipping 1997) may reﬂect a crucial advantage of large size at release in avoiding predation in the vicinity of the release site. hatchery-reared ﬁsh are inexperienced in dealing with predators and may be easy to capture by piscivores preying close to the release site (olla et al. 1994). however, their size at release could provide them with refuge from predation. the northern pike (esox lucius l.) is an important predator species of migratory salmonids in northern regions (larsson 1985; vehanen 1995; jepsen et al. 1998, 2000; aarestrup et al. 1999) and evidence shows that predation by pike can considerably reduce the number of brown_trout in a short time (jepsen et al. 1998, 2000). laboratory experiments, pike have also shown themselves to be size-selective predators preferring small prey sizes (beyerle & williams 1968; hart & connelan 1984; hart & hamrin 1988; nilsson & bro¨ nmark 2000). however, greater understanding of the size-selective preying of pike on stocked salmonids would help to achieve better results in salmonid stocking pro- grammes. in several the purpose here was to examine whether predation by pike on newly released hatchery-reared brown_trout was size-dependent, and whether it could be predicted. furthermore, to evaluate the probability of brown_trout migration routes and pike habitat crossed, we monitored daily movements of brown_trout and the distribution of pike in the release area. 77 hyva¨ rinen & vehanen material and methods study area the study area, kajaaninjoki river (fig. 1), is regu- lated for hydropower production, with the power plant situated 9 km upstream from the river’s outlet at lake ouluja¨rvi (surface area 928 km2). the average dis- the river during the study period was charge of )1). to compensate for 55.8 m3 s )1 (sd ±33.3 m3 s fig. 1. the study area. (a) grey spots represent relocations of age-3 brown_trout and black spots relocations of age-4 brown_trout. ‘p’ indicates the location of brown_trout eaten by pike. (b) all pike relocations. labels a, b, c and d indicate the capture and release site of tagged pike. the number beside the letter is the number of pike tagged and released at each site. the dotted line indicates the area where the automatic tracking station recorded outmigrating ﬁsh. 78 habitat losses from water level regulation, brown_trout (total length, tl 20–30 cm) have been annually stocked in lake ouluja¨rvi and its ascending rivers (psv ltd 2001). the most abundant predator species both in lake ouluja¨rvi and in the river kajaaninjoki is pike, but burbot [lota lota (l.)] and pikeperch (sander lucioperca l.) are also present in these areas (psv ltd 2001). brown_trout tagging and release a total of 40 hatchery-reared brown_trout were radio- tagged 4–6 days before release into the kajaaninjoki river (see location in fig. 1a) on 4 june 2002. twenty of the brown_trout were age-3 ﬁsh (table 1) and 20 were age-4. the younger ﬁsh were as large as large smolts in some finnish rivers and the older ﬁsh approximately as large as lake-run brown_trout after 1 year foraging in a large lake (huusko et al. 1990). both age groups originated from the same lake- migrating strain reared at the hatchery (kainuu fisheries research and aquaculture) situated close to lake ouluja¨rvi. the brown_trout were anaesthetized in benzocaine before tagging. the radio transmitters (table 1) were surgically implanted using a shielded- needle technique (adams et al. 1998a). the incision was closed with one to two separate sutures and duration of the operation was 3–4 min. the ratio of tag weight for age-3 brown_trout averaged 1.6% (range 1.1–1.9%) and for age-4 ﬁsh 1.5% (range 1.3–2.1%), remaining well below the recommended maximum of 2% (winter 1983; adams et al. 1998b). to ﬁsh weight pike tagging and release a total of 113 pike were caught from the kajaanin- joki river by seine net, gillnets, ﬁshing rods and trap nets during 10–27 may 2002. from these ﬁsh, a total of 40 pike (table 1, fig. 2) were radio-tagged and released at their capture sites (see position in fig. 1b) during 10–23 may 2002. for tagging, the pike were chosen on the basis of their size. our purpose was to examine the behaviour of pike that were potential predators of the radio-tagged and released brown_trout. we estimated that the smallest (tl 578 mm) the smallest (tl tagged pike was able to ingest 265 mm) (see ‘brown_trout vulnerability to predation’). the radio transmitters were implanted into pike using the same method as with brown_trout. the incision was closed with three separate sutures and duration of the operation was 3–4 min. the ﬁsh were allowed to recover 10–15 min before release at their capture site. the ratio of tag weight to ﬁsh weight was a mean of 0.9% (range 0.4–1.4%). tagged brown_trout body size affects survival of brown_trout table 1. information of the tagged brown_trout (bt) and pike and the radio-tags used for each release group. release group bt (age-3) bt (age-4) pike n 20 20 40 length mean [range (mm)] weight mean [range (g)] depth (d) or gape (g) mean [range (mm)] tag model (lotek) tag weight in air (g) tag pulse rate (bpm) tag operational life (days) 287 (265–321) 372 (355–387) 674 (578–922) 240 (191–322) 586 (414–700) 2043 (1100–4590) 61 (56–69) (d) 80 (75–83) (d) 66 (56–90) (g) mbft-2 mbft-5 mcft-3a 3.7 8.9 16 31.5 31.5 40.0 53 254 397 depth of radio-tagged brown_trout (n ¼ 40) and the gape size frequency distribution of pike sampled (n ¼ 113) from the kajaaninjoki river. the pike were randomly sampled by seine net, trap net, gillnet and trolling 7–24 days before brown_trout release. the model of hambright et al. (1991) was used to calculate the relative vulnerabilities (v) of brown_trout on pike predation. the model describes how the probability of ingestion decreases as prey ﬁsh body depth (d) increases relative to piscivore mouth width (w) as (hambright et al. 1991) vd ¼ 1   x d w w ¼0 fig. 2. the size distribution of pike sampled by seine net, trap net, gillnet and trolling between 10 may and 27 may 2002 from the river kajaaninjoki. the grey section of the bar indicates untagged pike (n ¼ 73) and the black section pike that was radio tagged and released (n ¼ 40). the smallest tagged pike was estimated to be able to ingest the smallest tagged brown_trout (see fig. 3). radiotracking to determine the position of the tagged ﬁsh, we tracked them from a boat using a lotek receiver (srx_400; lotek wireless inc., newmarket, canada) and a ﬁve-element directional handheld yagi antenna. the coordinates of the ﬁsh position were obtained using the global positioning system. the water depth of ﬁsh position was measured using an echo sounder, when the depth was over 1 m and with a measuring rod, if it was less than 1 m. all ﬁsh in the study area were tracked once each day between 07.30 and 20.00 hours during the study period (24 may to 20 june for pike, and 4 june to 20 june for brown_trout), or until the ﬁsh moved out of the study area. the movement of ﬁsh from the kajaaninjoki river to lake ouluja¨rvi was determined by an automatic tracking station (see position in fig. 1) using a lotek receiver (srx_400) with automatic recording and nine-element yagi antenna installed at the outlet of the stream. the receiver continuously monitored each frequency for 3 s to complete a scan cycle in 4 min. brown_trout vulnerability to predation to predict the relative vulnerability of age-3 and age-4 brown_trout to pike predation we analysed the body where w is the frequency of mouth widths in the pike population. for the model calculations we measured the total length of all the sampled 113 pike (including tagged pike) to the nearest millimetre (fig. 2) and the regression between pike mouth width and total length: w ¼ 0.098 · tl ) 0.339 estimated by nilsson & bro¨ nmark (2000) was used to calculate the pike gape size. brown_trout total length and body depth was measured to the nearest millimetre. depth was measured dorsoventrally just anterior to the dorsal ﬁn. the linear regression between brown_trout total length (tl) and body depth (d) found in our study was d ¼ 0.222 · tl ) 2.403 (n ¼ 40, r2 ¼ 0.98). radiotracking was used to determine the causes of death for brown_trout. if a pike was observed carrying the tag of brown_trout, we attempted to catch it. in addition, if a tagged brown_trout had been stationary for 24 h, we suspected that it had been eaten by predator. stationary ﬁsh were located as accurately as possible to enable visual observation. if visual obser- vation by boat was not possible, diving was used to ﬁnd the ﬁsh or defecated tag. data analysis to determine daily movements of each brown_trout we calculated linear distance between coordinates of two subsequent observations. if a ﬁsh migrated from the study area, the coordinates from the middle of the river on the automatic tracking line (fig. 1) were given for this ﬁsh on that day. five ﬁsh disappeared from the study area and were not recorded by the automatic tracking station; found in lake they were later 79 hyva¨ rinen & vehanen ouluja¨rvi by scanning from a boat or were caught by ﬁsherman who returned the tag. in these cases, the ﬁsh were assumed to have migrated to lake ouluja¨rvi the day they disappeared from the study area. to test for differences in rate of migration speed and used depths between age groups of brown_trout, the mann–whitney u-test was applied. the difference in predation rate between the two age groups of brown_trout was tested with fisher’s exact test. results estimated versus observed brown_trout vulnerabilities as estimated by the model of hambright et al. (1991), the gape size distribution of pike population from the kajaaninjoki river indicated that age-3 brown_trout were highly vulnerable to pike predation, whereas age- 4 ﬁsh enjoyed close to an absolute size refuge from predation (fig. 3). approximately 45% of the sampled 113 pike were estimated to be able to ingest the smallest age-3 brown_trout but only 5% of the pikes were estimated to be able to ingest the smallest age-4 brown_trout (fig. 3). when causes of mortality of all tagged brown_trout were analysed (see below), a total of 10 age-3 and one age-4 radio-tagged brown_trout were eaten by pike (fig. 3). pike predation on age-3 brown_trout was signiﬁcantly higher than that on age-4 fig. 3. distribution of body depths of tagged age-3 (n ¼ 20) and age-4 (n ¼ 20) brown_trout. the grey section of the bar indicates brown_trout eaten by pike and the black section brown_trout that survived pike predation in the river kajaaninjoki. brown_trout relative vulnerabilities (v) to pike predation were estimated by the model of hambright et al. (1991). the line describes how the probability of ingestion decreases as brown_trout body depth increases relative to pike gape size. when v ¼ 1, brown_trout body depth is less than or equal to the smallest pike gape size and the brown_trout can be ingest by all ﬁsh from the examined pike population. when v ¼ 0 brown_trout body depth is greater than the largest pike gape size and the brown_trout enjoys size refuge from all individuals of the pike population. when 0 < v < 1 brown_trout can be ingested by intermediate fraction of the pike population (cf. hambright et al. 1991). 80 brown_trout (v2 ¼ 10.15, d.f. ¼ 1, p ¼ 0.003). when observed mortality (grey parts of bars in fig. 3) was compared with estimated vulnerabilities (hambright et al. 1991) (line in fig. 3), the model predicted the ﬁnal observed outcome well. observations of not-surviving brown_trout in eight of 10 age-3 brown_trout consumed by pike, the pike were either seen (four) or captured (four) carrying the brown_trout tag. of the four pike seen carrying the tag (but not captured) three later defecated the tag; the tags were found by diving 1–9 days after ﬁrst pike observation. another two tags were found immobile on the river bottom, but because of the depth and poor visibility they could not retrieved. based on earlier observations, these two brown_trout were also eaten and defecated by ﬁsh predators, most probably by pike. no evidence from other predators (such as burbot or pike-perch) consuming brown_trout was found in this study. in total, 10 age-3 brown_trout were eaten by pike within 7 days of release (figs 1a and 4a). eight age-3 brown_trout were eaten by pike in the vicinity of the release site, two of them upstream and six downstream (fig. 4a). two ﬁsh were consumed close to the stream outlet (figs 1a and 4a). none of the tagged age-3 brown_trout were caught by ﬁshermen in the study area. no direct observations of age-4 brown_trout eaten by pike were made during the study period. one tag was found immobile on the river bottom and that particular ﬁsh was interpreted to have been eaten by pike (as with age-3 ﬁsh, see above) (figs 1a and 4b). two ﬁsh were caught by ﬁshermen: one below the dam by rod and one near the outlet of the river by trapnet. observations of surviving brown_trout from a total of 10 age-3 brown_trout not eaten by pike, eight migrated from the study area to lake ouluja¨rvi within 3 days of release (fig. 4a). one ﬁsh disap- peared 2 days following release close to the release site. after 7 days of release only one living age-3 brown_trout remained in the study area. this individ- ual had moved upstream to the strong and turbulent current area below the dam, where it stayed until recorded by the automatic tracking station 68 days after release, indicating outmigration to lake ou- luja¨rvi (fig. 4a). of the 17 age-4 brown_trout not eaten by pike or captured, nine outmigrated from the study area to lake ouluja¨rvi within 3 days of release (fig. 4b). one ﬁsh disappeared in the area below the dam, where rod ﬁshing is common; the tagged ﬁsh was possibly captured but the tag was not returned. the remaining (n ¼ 7) ﬁsh emigrated within 4–16 days after release. three of these moved ﬁrst upstream to the area below body size affects survival of brown_trout groups used mainly similar routes when moving to lake ouluja¨rvi. the mean daily movement for all age- 3 brown_trout locations was 1589 m (sd ±1915, n ¼ 74) and for age-4 brown_trout 1797 m (sd ±2066, n ¼ 120) and no statistical difference (u ¼ 0.163, d.f. ¼ 1, p ¼ 0.686) was found between these movements. the mean depth at locations for age-3 ﬁsh was 4.1 m (sd ±3.5, n ¼ 67) and for age-4 ﬁsh 4.4 m (sd ±3.2, n ¼ 104). no statistical differ- ence (u ¼ 0.701, d.f. ¼ 1, p ¼ 0.402) was found between these observed depths. living ﬁsh from both age groups were only seldom observed close to or within vegetation. observations of pike the pike were caught and tagged during spawning time. before the brown_trout release, pike were distributed widely between the brown_trout release site and the river outlet or as far as to lake ouluja¨rvi (fig. 1b). of the 40 radio-tagged pike, four moved from the study area before daily tracking began (24 may 2002) and were not found during the study period. seven of the remaining 36 pike migrated from the study area to lake ouluja¨rvi between 24 may and 4 june and only one pike migrated (8 june) after the release of brown_trout. at the end of the study period (20 june), a total of 28 pike still remained in the study area. the total number of observed pike locations was 827 (fig. 1b). tagged pike were present in the same area as brown_trout except in the strong current area below the dam (fig. 1a,b). discussion the higher predation rate by pike on smaller age-3 than on age-4 brown_trout indicated that pike are highly size-selective predators, which is in accordance with previous laboratory studies (beyerle & williams 1968; hart & connelan 1984; hart & hamrin 1988; nilsson & bro¨ nmark 2000). the body depth of the stocked age-4 brown_trout was greater than the gape size of most pike present in the study area and therefore these ﬁsh were estimated on the basis of the model by hambright et al. (1991) to enjoy an almost absolute size refuge from pike predation in the kajaaninjoki river. slight observed predation rate of these ﬁsh also indicated that the estimation of the model was realistic. using the same model, the stocked age-3 brown_trout were estimated to be vulnerable to almost half of the members in the pike population and the observed high predation rate supported the model estimation. in a laboratory experiment, nilsson & bro¨nmark (2000) showed that pike can eat larger prey (i.e., more deep) than their gape size would limit. the differences 81 fig. 4. daily distance of radio-tagged brown_trout from release site (0) for age-3 (a) and age-4 (b) brown_trout. the distances represent metres downstream (positive) and upstream (negative). the minimum value ()3500 m) indicates the location of the dam upstream from the release site and the maximum value (5800 m) indicates the location of the tracking station from the release site (see locations also in fig. 1). the dotted line indicates ﬁsh observations before death. letters at the end of the dotted line indicate cause of death: p ¼ eaten by pike, c ¼ captured by ﬁsherman. the solid grey line indicates a ﬁsh’s movement before it disappeared (d). the solid black line indicates ﬁsh observations before migrating from the study area to lake ouluja¨rvi, and the number above the end of the black line indicates the number of ﬁsh that outmigrated each day. the dam and then emigrated individually (figs 1a and 4a). effect of size on brown_trout movements on the basis of the methods used, no signiﬁcant differences were found in brown_trout behaviour that could have inﬂuenced predation rate between the two compared brown_trout age groups. the ﬁsh from both hyva¨ rinen & vehanen that in the size and species distribution and abundance of available prey ﬁsh together probably also affect the preying behaviour of pike. however, our results suggest the model of hambright et al. (1991) would give guidelines in estimating different-sized brown_trout vulnerabilities on pike predation and may therefore be useful for stocking management purposes. the data of the predator’s size distribution is crucial to the results of the used model and therefore the sampling method may also affect the results. in this study, the data from the pike population in the river kajaaninjoki was randomly sampled by seine net, trap net, gillnet and trolling, thus it probably gave a realistic description of the pike population recruited to these gears. the size distribution of tagged pike conformed to the upper part of the entire pike size distribution describing the part of pike population we were interested in: pike able to consume stocked brown_trout. in our study the smallest tagged pike was estimated to be able to consume the smallest tagged brown_trout. the brown_trout stocked here were naive hatchery- reared ﬁsh having no experience of predators before their release. olla & davis (1989) suggested that ﬁsh having already experienced predators survived better than naive ﬁsh when both were exposed to predators at the same time. brown & smith (1998) suggested that the chemical cues of a predatory ﬁsh could be used to train hatchery-reared ﬁsh to recognize predators prior to stocking. for predator-naive hatchery-reared brown_trout in our study, the ﬁrst 7 days proved to be fateful depending on the size of the ﬁsh and its moving behaviour. in the study area downstream, migration of ﬁsh was not restricted and consequently almost half of the ﬁsh from both age groups of brown_trout survived and moved to the lake with similar routes within 3 days of release. however, there was a considerable difference in survival between brown_trout age groups for ﬁsh that remained in the river for a longer period. of these, all except one age-3 brown_trout were eaten by pike within 7 days of release, whereas all but one age-4 ﬁsh survived predation for a maximum of 16 days until moving out of the river. jepsen et al. (2000) found that wild radio-tagged brown_trout smolts in a river reservoir were eaten by predatory ﬁshes when they had difﬁculties ﬁnding their way out of the reservoir. the outlet sluice to ﬁnd out and thus operation made it difﬁcult determined the fate of these ﬁsh (jepsen et al. 2000). in the present study, downstream migration of ﬁsh was not restricted and we suggest that the behaviour of age-3 brown_trout with slow start of migration to their foraging areas and their small size related to size of pike present in the release area together determined their fate. it was suggested that 82 it is possible that the better survival of age-4 brown_trout also reﬂects their age, with more experience and different behaviour, besides their size compared with age-3 brown_trout. however, both ﬁsh were of the same hatchery origin having no previous experience of predators. we either did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant differences in movements or in used depths between brown_trout age groups. we therefore believe that their previous experience had little effect on survival between the age and size groups. it appeared that only those brown_trout that emigrated from the study area soon after release or resided in the strong current below the dam actually survived from the study area. of the seven brown_trout that visited the area below the dam, six were age-4 and there was only one age-3 ﬁsh. none of the tagged pike were found from that area and it is probable that brown_trout had better refuge from pike predation in the strong current than in other parts of the study area with slow current. however, on the basis of the present data, it remained unclear whether there were real differences in behaviour between brown_trout groups in respect of moving upstream. one age-3 ﬁsh moved to the area below the dam and it is possible that some other trout from this group also moved upstream towards the dam, but were predated. (2000) suggested that pike spawning time occurred early in this study. jepsen et al. the overlap between the pike spawning period and brown_trout smolt run may prevent pike from preying on brown_trout, because at that time pike were not moving in the migration routes of the brown_trout. contrary to the suggestion of jepsen et al. (2000), the movements and the distribution of radio-tagged pike together with the pike predation on age-3 brown_trout observed in this study suggest that regardless of the pike spawning it to ﬁnd a safe and recommendable time for small brown_trout stocking in the kajaaninjoki river, when there would not be a large number of pike present in the brown_trout migration routes. is difﬁcult regardless of the clear differences in predation rate between brown_trout age groups estimated in this study, some inaccuracy may have inﬂuenced our results. it is possible that some of the outmigrated brown_trout were already eaten by pike in the river and the pike including the ingested tag had then moved from the study area and were recorded by the automatic tracking station. however, only one tagged pike migrated to lake ouluja¨rvi after brown_trout stocking. we therefore believe that outmigration of untagged pike from the kajaaninjoki river from the release of brown_trout to the end of study period (4 june to 20 june) was unlikely and consequently the observed outmigrated brown_trout were alive and not pike carrying a brown_trout tag. another possible misinterpretation may be our suggestion that all transmitters found on the river bottom were eaten by pike and then defecated. however, we found direct evidence that our assump- tion was correct. three pike that were seen carrying transmitters of brown_trout defecated the transmitters and these tags were found without any remains on the river bottom after 1–9 days. similarly, jepsen et al. (1998) reported that when a radio-tagged smolt was eaten by pike, the transmitter was found on the river bottom within 3–6 days. the tag of three brown_trout (two age-3 and one age-4) in this study was found from the river bottom, but the possible predator was not seen at the site. these trout could also have been eaten by other ﬁsh predator species than pike. burbot and pikeperch were known to be present in the study area and were also possible predators. however, no evidence from predation on brown_trout by other species than pike was found in this study. more frequent tracking than used 24 h might have enabled us to obtain better interpretation for the fate of these three ﬁsh. the two ﬁsh that disappeared unrecorded by the automatic tracking station could have been eaten by avian predators (see jepsen et al. 1998; dieperink et al. 2001, 2002). however, only one possible avian predator (a grey heron, ardea cinerea) was seen during ﬁsh tracking, indicating that avian predation on brown_trout was unlikely. these missing ﬁsh were most likely captured by ﬁshermen and the transmitters not returned. the study area the kajaaninjoki river was histor- ically a migration route for brown_trout smolts descending to the lake. currently the river is used for hydropower production and only some kilometres from the river mouth, which we used for our study, ﬂow freely. the principal foraging areas of stocked brown_trout in lake ouluja¨rvi are large basins downstream from the study area and very likely the tagged trout that emigrated from the study area moved towards these foraging areas. matured brown_trout usually search for spawning areas from their release sites and areas such as kajaaninjoki river are popular among sport ﬁshermen. this was also one of the objectives when release sites are chosen. we suggest that, if the release site cannot be chosen from predator- free areas, high predation rates from pike can be decreased by stocking brown_trout that are large enough to enjoy size refuge from predators at the release site. resumen 1. un total de 40 individuos de salmo_trutta (20 de edad-3 y 20 de edad-4) procedentes de piscifactorı´a fueron marcados con radio-transmisores y 40 individuos de esox lucius tambie´n body size affects survival of brown_trout marcados con radio-transmisores, fueron soltados en un rı´o regulado. predecimos y observamos que los individuos de edad-3 de s. trutta fueron altamente vulnerables a la predacio´ n por esox lucius (50 % de mortalidad) mientras que los individuos de edad-4 gozaron de refugio de taman˜o casi absoluto de la predacio´ n (5% de mortalidad). 2. casi la mitad de los peces de ambos grupos de edad sobrevivieron y emigraron del rı´o durante los tres dı´as siguientes a la suelta. sin embargo, hubo una considerable diferencia en la supervivencia entre grupos de edad para los peces que permanecieron en el rı´o por un perı´odo mayor de tiempo. de estos, todos excepto 1 individuo de s. trutta de edad-3 fueron comidos por e. lucius mientras que todos excepto un individuo de edad-4 sobrevivieron a la predacio´ n. acknowledgements we thank tapio laaksonen, kimmo johansson, ville leppa¨ni- emi, saku ivanov, ari kauttu and jaana kauttu for helping with data collecting and mari nyka¨nen for helping with data analysis. we thank ari huusko and two anonymous referees for constructive comments on the earlier drafts of this manuscript. thanks are also extended to the employment and economic development centre for kainuu for cooperation during the study. the experimental procedures used in this study conform to local ethical requirements. references aarestrup, k., jepsen, n., rasmussen, g. & oekland, f. 1999. movements of two strains of radio tagged atlantic salmon, salmo_salar l., through a reservoir. fisheries management and ecology 2: 97–107. smolts adams, n.s., rondorf, d.w., evans, s.d. & kelly, j.e. 1998a. effects of surgically and gastrically implanted radio trans- mitters on growth and feeding behavior of juvenile chinook salmon. transactions of the american fisheries society 127, 128–136. adams, n.s., rondorf, d.w., evans, s.d., kelly, j.e. & perry, r.w. 1998b. effects of surgically and gastrically implanted radio transmitters on swimming performance and predator avoidance of juvenile chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55, 781–787. beyerle g.b. & williams j.e. 1968. some observations of food selectivity by northern pike in aquaria. transactions of the american fisheries society 97, 28–31. brown, g.e. & smith, r.j.f. 1998. acquired predator recognition in juvenile rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss): conditioning hatchery-reared ﬁsh to recognize chemical cues or a predator. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55, 611–617. dieperink, c., pedersen, s. & pedersen, m.i. 2001. estuarine predation on radiotagged wild and domesticated sea_trout (salmo_trutta l.) smolts. ecology of freshwater fish 10, 177–183. dieperink, c., bak, b.d., pedersen, l.f., pedersen, m.i. & pedersen, s. 2002. predation on atlantic salmon and sea_trout during their ﬁrst days as postsmolts. journal of fish biology 61, 848–852. 83 olla, b.l. & davis, m.w. 1989. the role of learning and stress in predator avoidance of hatchery-reared coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) juveniles. aquaculture 76, 209–214. olla, b.l., davis, m.w. & ryer, c.h. 1994. behavioural deﬁcits in hatchery-reared ﬁsh: potential effects on survival following release. aquaculture and fisheries management 25, 1–19. psv ltd. 2001. ouluja¨rven kalataloustarkkailu v. 2000. pohjois-suomen vesitutkimustoimisto oy. oulu. 41 pp. (in finnish). salminen, m., kuikka, s. & erkamo, e. 1995. annual variability in survival of sea-ranched baltic salmon, salmo_salar l: signiﬁcance of smolt size and marine conditions. fisheries management and ecology 2, 171–184. skurdal, j., hegge, o. & hesthagen, t. 1989. exploitation rate, survival and movements of brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.) stocked at takeable size in the regulated rivers la˚gen and otta, southern norway. regulated rivers: research & management 3, 247–253. tipping, j.m. 1997. effect of smolt length at release on adult returns of hatchery-reared winter steelhead. the progressive fish-culturist 59, 310–311. vehanen, t. 1995. factors inﬂuencing the yield of brown_trout, in northern finnish lakes. salmo_trutta m. fisheries management and ecology 2, 121–134. lacustris l., winter, j.d. 1983. underwater biotelemetry. in: nielsen, l.a. & johnson, d.l. eds. fisheries techniques. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 371–395. hyva¨ rinen & vehanen hambright, k.d., drenner, r.w., mccomas, s.r. & hairston, n.g. jr. 1991. gape-limited piscivores: planktivore size refuges and the trophic cascade hypothesis. archiv fur hydrobiologie 121, 389–404. hart, p.j.b. & connelan, b. 1984. cost of prey capture, growth rate and ration in size in pike, esox lucius l., as functions of prey weight. journal of fish biology 25, 279–292. hart, p. & hamrin, s.f. 1988. pike as a selective predator. effects of prey size, availability, cover and pike jaw dimensions. oikos 51, 220–226. huusko, a., van der meer, o. & koljonen, m.-l. 1990. life history patterns and genetic differences in brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.) in the koutajoki river system. polskie archiwum hydrobiologii 37, 63–77. jepsen, n., aarestrup, k., økland, f. & rasmussen, g. 1998. survival of radio-tagged atlantic salmon (salmo_salar l.) and trout (salmo_trutta l.) smolts passing a reservoir during a seaward migration. hydrobiologia 371/372, 347–353. jepsen, n., pedersen, s. & thorstad, e. 2000. behavioural interactions between prey (trout smolts) and predators (pike and pikeperch) in an impounded river. regulated rivers: research & management 16, 189–198. larsson, p.o. 1985. predation on migrating smolts as a regulating factor in baltic salmon, salmo_salar l., popula- tions. journal of fish biology 26, 391–397. nilsson, p.a. & bro¨nmark, c. 2000. prey vulnerability to a gape-size limited predator: behavioural and morphological impacts on northern pike piscivory. oikos 88, 539–546. 84  