ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 200–210 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved ó 2006 the authors journal compilation ó blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish linking habitat selection, emigration and population dynamics of freshwater ﬁshes: a synthesis of ideas and approaches mcmahon te, matter wj. linking habitat selection, emigration and population dynamics of freshwater ﬁshes: a synthesis of ideas and approaches. ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 200–210. ó blackwell munksgaard, 2006 t. e. mcmahon1, w. j. matter2 1department of ecology, fish and wildlife program, montana state university, bozeman, mt, 2school of natural resources, university of arizona, tucson, az usa abstract – the consequences of individual behaviour to dynamics of populations has been a critical question in ﬁsh ecology, but linking the two has proven difﬁcult. a modiﬁcation of sale’s habitat selection model provides a conceptual linkage for relating resource availability and individual habitat selection to exploratory behaviour, emigration and population-level responses. whole-population experiments with pupﬁsh cyprinodon macularius that linked all factors along this resource to population continuum lend support to this conceptual model, and illustrate that emigration may be much more common in ﬁsh populations than considered in most individual- or population-based models. accommodating emigration can enhance the ecological appropriateness of behavioural experiments and increase conﬁdence in extrapolation of experimental observations to population-level effects. new experimental designs and advancing technologies offer avenues for assessing population consequences of habitat selection and emigration by individual ﬁsh. emigration often is the key linkage between individual behaviour and population responses, and greater understanding of the underlying factors affecting this often-overlooked demographic parameter could offer new approaches for management and conservation of ﬁshes. key words: habitat selection, emigration, disper- sal, ﬁsh behaviour, population dynamics, meta- populations t. e. mcmahon, department of ecology, fish and wildlife program, montana state university, bozeman, mt 59717, usa; e-mail: tmcmahon@montana.edu accepted for publication december 10, 2005 life, and the freedom to move, are one. (haida proverb) introduction population biologists justiﬁably tend to be more interested in population-level processes than in the behaviour and fates of individual organisms. whereas populations have demographic features, such as birth rate, death rate and population growth rate that individuals within the population do not have, it is increasingly recognised that these demographic fea- tures ultimately are the result of the behaviours of individual animals, behaviours that inﬂuence growth, success and movements reproductive survival, (lomnicki 1988; sutherland 1996). despite the increased interest in the role of individual behaviour in population dynamics, details of the link between the two are poorly understood (sutherland 1996; lidicker 2002). for example, biologists know that population growth must be the result of additions of individuals through birth and immigration and removal of individuals through death and emigration. however, immigration and emigration frequently are discounted in population dynamics models – that typically focus on birth and death rates as primary driving forces – partly because immigration and emigration are so inherently difﬁcult to measure 200 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00130.x (lomnicki 1988; lidicker 2002). yet immigration and emigration may be numerically important and vital to normal population processes (hanski 2001), including responses to management actions (riley & fausch 1995). however, biologists know surprisingly little about what conditions trigger emigration, which individuals are likely to become emigrants, and how emigration and immigration inﬂuence population dynamics (nathan 2001). the importance of emigration came to the forefront of population ecology with the discovery that popula- tions of a diverse assortment of animals rapidly overpopulate when emigration is prevented (see list in mcmahon & tash 1988). in addition, emigration has received renewed attention in the recent develop- ment of metapopulation theory and source–sink dynamics (e.g. kristan 2003), and is viewed as a vital factor for maintaining biodiversity in fragmented landscapes through recolonisation, demographic sup- port and gene ﬂow (hanski 2001). for freshwater ﬁshes, movement among habitats is now recognised as the norm rather than the exception across many taxa (lucas & baras 2001). as with all animals, the difﬁculty of measuring emigration and of unambiguously distinguishing it from normal foraging movements, local exploratory behaviours and migra- tion are major impediments to unravelling its causes and consequences (matter et al. 1989). moreover, there is much uncertainty in extrapolating from mechanistic, small-scale studies of habitat selection and emigration, to the larger scale context of temporal and spatial population dynamics, and vice versa (lidicker 2002; lowe 2003). however, as humston et al. (2004) noted, realistic models of large-scale movements and spatial structure and population dynamics of ﬁshes require a thorough understanding of the proximate mechanisms eliciting movement at small scales. we present a conceptual model that links resource availability, habitat selection, exploratory behaviour and emigration of individual animals at small scales, to the spatial and temporal dynamics of populations at larger scales. we use whole-population experiments on emigration in a freshwater ﬁsh to test this model, and present approaches for measuring emigration in the laboratory and the ﬁeld. we deﬁne emigration as the one-way movement away from a home area (lidicker & stenseth 1992), as a special type of dispersal, which is typically used more broadly to deﬁne all types of nonmigratory movement outside a home range (hendry et al. 2004). our focus is on the movement of individuals away from a home area that equates to ‘loss’ of individuals from a site and thereby affects local population density as well as the popu- lation characteristics of the area where immigrants settle. a distinction between ‘facultative’ and habitat selection, emigration & population dynamics ‘obligative’ movement is also important (bell 1991). we focus on factors inﬂuencing facultative or condi- tion-dependent movement – voluntary movement made in response to changes in resource needs or resource access from such factors as increased density, reduced food, need for cover or mate seeking (ims & hjermann 2001; massot et al. 2002) – in contrast to obligative movement, an innate movement in response to some external cue or endogenous clock (e.g. posthatching dispersal in larvae or downstream smolt migration) (howard 1960; dytham 2003). linking habitat selection, emigration and population dynamics: a conceptual model one of the most important attributes of ﬁsh and other mobile animals is the ability to move away from unsuitable conditions. however, for mobility to have its greatest adaptive advantage, organisms must be able to assess biotic and abiotic conditions such that exploratory behaviour is triggered ‘on’ by inadequate or unsuitable conditions, and triggered ‘off’ when individuals encounter suitable conditions (sale 1969a; bell 1991). to do this, animals must be able to perceive environmental features that, over evolution- ary time, have been associated with survival and reproductive success for the species (kristan 2003). during habitat selection, animals respond by remaining in areas that hold the proper suite of environmental cues, but continuing to search more widely when these cues are not present in a local area, even if this requires that they move through areas unsuitable for the species (matter et al. 1989; bonte et al. 2004). cues that trigger exploratory behaviour may include unfavourable environmental conditions, inadequacy of resources or unacceptable interactions with resident animals, including intra- and interspe- ciﬁc competitors and predators (bell 1991). in this way, movement is viewed as a condition-dependent trait that can be triggered by many different cues (ims & hjermann 2001). sale (1969a)) provided an early conceptual model linking resource availability, motivation and explora- tory behaviour in ﬁsh (fig. 1). sale theorised that habitat selection is a continually active process governed by the intensity of exploratory (appetitive or searching) behaviour via a negative feedback loop, with exploratory behaviour governed by the interac- tion of for needed resources (a) with the perceived availability of those resources in the environment (b). external and internal stimuli perceived by the central nervous system serve to regulate exploratory behaviour (c). internal drives (motivation) sale hypothesised that exploratory behaviour leads to variation in the immediate environment (d) experi- enced by an individual, which, leads to in turn, 201 mcmahon & matter )seuc(tnemnorivneetaidemmi rehto,htped,erutarepmet,revoc,doof .ctehsif (d) stimulus perception seucfo (b) noitceles“snc ”msinahcem (c) internal factors level”evird“gnitaluger (resource needs) (a) ycnediser (g) reduced yrotarolpxe ruoivaheb (f) y se resource needs met? on deunitnoc yrotarolpxe ruoivaheb (e) lasrepsid ,noitargime( )noitargimmi (h) laropmet (j) laitaps (i) otsecneuqesnoc dnasnoitalupop snoitalupopatem n t fig. 1. schematic representation of the habitat selection-emigration model modiﬁed from sale (1969a). cns, central nervous system. letters referenced in the text. changes in the level of stimuli (b) animals use to assess availability or access to needed resources. thus, the model predicts that exploratory behaviour will be most intense when environments are perceived as less adequate (e), and exploration will diminish when an environment is perceived as suitable (f), leading to residency (g). as a result of this process, the intensity of exploratory behaviour (movement rate) is inversely proportional to the quality of available habitat (winker et al. 1995). furthermore, the model suggests that exploratory behaviour can be triggered by a host of factors affecting both resource needs and availability. tests of the model in the laboratory with manini (acanthurus triostegus sandvicensis), a tropical reef ﬁsh, conﬁrmed that the intensity of searching beha- viour varied greatly dependent on water depth and presence of cover. searching behaviour was lowest when ﬁsh had access to shallow water with cover, the preferred habitat of manini in the ﬁeld (sale 1969b). sale did not address emigration directly in his model, so the question remains: how does exploratory behaviour relate to emigration? we hypothesise that emigratory behaviour can be viewed as a more intense form of exploratory behaviour (h). this is analogous to sale’s observation that searching behaviour was 202 expressed nearly continuously in the presence of deep water with no cover – the least preferred conditions in the ﬁeld. thus, emigration events are likely to occur when environments that lack adequate resources (or access thereof) trigger continued exploration until animals eventually emigrate from an area in search of suitable conditions elsewhere. experiments with sev- eral different animals support this hypothesis (matter et al. 1989; nelson et al. 2002). viewed in this way, the decision to stay in an area or emigrate represents two ends of a continuum of complementary beha- vioural responses that may be elicited from any individual of a mobile animal species in response to the adequacy of the site currently occupied. the summation of the many such individual behavioural responses of ﬁsh to local conditions in relation to their environmental and physiological requirements will not only be a key determinant of the density of individuals occupying a site but, in turn, the resulting emigration will drive the larger scale spatial (i) and temporal (j) population dynamics within a landscape (fig. 1) (lidicker 2002; humston et al. 2004; kritzer & sale 2004). although this habitat selection-emigration model is conceptually simple, we believe it provides a useful in these studies it explanatory tool for linking individual behaviour to population dynamics. to date, habitat selection has been explained primarily through the optimisation models based on ideal-free and ideal-despotic theories. according to optimisation models, well summarised for ﬁshes by kramer et al. (1997), population density in concert with habitat quality is the main driver of the decision of individuals to settle in or move away from habitat patches of differing quality. these models have been used proﬁtably to predict local ﬁsh distributions in the ﬁeld based on balancing survival and net energy functions (e.g. hughes 2000; railsback & harvey 2002). however, is frequently unclear which proximate environmental cues or stimuli individual animals are using to assess habitat suitability (grossman et al. 1995). in addition, few habitat selection studies have explored the relationship of local movement within habitat patches to emigra- tion and large-scale population dynamics (doncaster 2000). furthermore, an important assumption of optimality models is that animals ‘sample’ all avail- able habitats before settling, yet animals often leave a site, in some cases moving across expanses of unsuitable conditions, without knowledge of the quality nor availability of other sites (mcmahon & tash 1988; matter et al. 1989; bonte et al. 2004). our model suggests that the quality of the local site in relation to current resource needs and access is the primary driver of habitat selection and exploration decisions, rather than information about conditions at distant sites. detailed observations of ﬁsh habitat selection and movement in nature also show a great deal of complexity and individual variation (e.g. armstrong et al. 1997, 1999; smithson & johnston 1999; diana et al. 2004) that are not readily explained by optimi- sation models (thorpe et al. 1998). for example, marked seasonal habitat shifts of ﬁshes during autumn may occur abruptly, without any apparent changes in food availability or habitat quality (riehle & grifﬁth 1993; jakober et al. 1998). similarly, nutritional or hormonal state can trigger movement away from a site of residence (forseth et al. 1999), movement that is not strictly dependent on density or resource availab- ility per se, but rather reﬂects changes in physiological needs of individuals (bell 1991). thus we believe that our model complements current habitat selection theory by extending it to include the underlying motivations and proximate environmental cues that govern habitat selection, and to explore the population dynamics consequences of habitat selection and movement patterns (see also grossman et al. 1995). the degree to which ﬁsh movement is a rather ﬁxed trait has been the subject of much discussion among ﬁsh ecologists (gowan et al. 1994; rodrı´guez 2002), and the idea that there are ‘mobile’ and ‘resident’ habitat selection, emigration & population dynamics factions among individuals within populations is common (see gowan et al. 1994 for discussion). indeed, dispersal has generally been viewed as an adaptive trait that evolved for colonisation of new environments, prevention of inbreeding depression or risk spreading in stochastic environments (e.g. kisdi 2002; hendry et al. 2004). in our model, individual differences in access to resources or changes in environmental or physiological requirements could elicit variation in movement among individuals from very limited to very mobile, thereby accounting for the wide variation in movement observed both within and among ﬁsh populations (smithson & johnston 1999; gowan & fausch 2002; rodrı´guez 2002; hilderbrand & kershner 2004). experiments with ﬁshes and other animals demonstrating that individual emigrants readily become residents when needed resources are supplied and that residents become emigrants when resources are limited (matter et al. 1989; nelson et al. 2002), to this inherent ﬂexibility in switching between residency and emigratory beha- viour. we hypothesise that emigration is primarily an adaptive response to the inadequacy of conditions at the site of residency, and other beneﬁts of movement to species persistence (risk spreading, gene ﬂow, colonisation of open habitat, rescue effect in meta- populations) accrue largely as a by-product of the movement resulting from habitat selection decisions as portrayed in our model. lend support case study: emigration and population dynamics of desert pupﬁsh linkage of individual behaviours to population-level responses often is hampered by the small scale of behavioural studies (laboratory or stream section) and by their short-term nature and focus on a particular time or phase of the life cycle (lowe 2003). these limitations have contributed to the view that ﬁndings from studies of individual behaviour are of limited value for extrapolation to overall population dynamics (lima & zollner 1996). in particular, a major impediment to examining the role of emigration in population dynamics has been the difﬁculty in unambiguously accounting for all individuals that leave a population and measuring the overall effects of these losses on population size in the light of the array of other additions and losses. our work with desert pupﬁsh (cyprinodon macular- ius) from western north american deserts has shown them to be ideal species for comprehensive study of mechanisms underlying population dynamics, and speciﬁcally the role of emigration (mcmahon & tash 1988). the small, relatively simple systems they inhabit – likely among the smallest occupied by an entire vertebrate population – can be readily duplicated 203 mcmahon & matter in small pools where pupﬁsh exhibit behaviours and population dynamics indistinguishable from those in nature. although this work was reported previously, we summarise its main results here because they come from one of the few studies of dispersal and population dynamics in ﬁshes at the whole-population level. the magnitude and timing of emigration and its overall relation to population vital parameters was examined experimentally by (i) comparing the dynam- ics of pupﬁsh populations in pools open and closed to emigration over several generations; and (ii) measur- ing the emigration response to direct manipulation of resource levels. we mimicked immigration into a new environment by adding several adult male and female pupﬁsh to outdoor pools that approximated the size of some of the smallest known pupﬁsh habitats, and ﬁsh readily reproduced. four pools were kept ‘closed’ to emigration. in four ‘open‘ pools, pupﬁsh were allowed to emigrate for 2 days every 2-3 weeks. to emigrate, pupﬁsh had to swim across a shallow, exposed shelf and over a small, shallow spillway notch and fall into a holding tank. this means of emigrating from open pools seemed to mimic conditions of natural spring pools and provide a sufﬁcient challenge that only certain ﬁsh were motivated to move through this gauntlet, supporting classiﬁcation of these individuals as emigrants (matter et al. 1989). populations were censused every 2 months over the 22-month test period. no supplemental food was provided. initially, abundance of pupﬁsh in open and closed pools grew exponentially, but populations in closed pools grew at a faster rate, peaked at a level 40% higher than populations in open pools, and then declined rapidly. during the decline, pupﬁsh in closed pools were in poor condition – weighing 20% less than ﬁsh in open pools – grew slowly, had low recruitment rate and exhibited the narrow length–frequency distri- butions characteristic of stunted ﬁsh populations (mcmahon & tash 1988). in contrast, during this same period, large numbers of pupﬁsh in open pools emigrated, and resident ﬁsh maintained high condition and growth, and exhibited no signs of stunting. in the second year of although population sizes in open and closed pools were similar the study, population parameters were very different in pools open and closed to emigration (table 1). in open pools, emigration accounted for a much larger pro- portion of losses than did mortality, and net production (reproduction – mortality) was over 2.5 times higher in open pools than in closed pools. overall, 84% of the pupﬁsh produced in open pools emigrated. the low reproduction and high mortality of ﬁsh in closed pools (table 1) clearly illustrated that the chances of survi- val and reproduction of ﬁsh that do not emigrate may be quite low in an area where access to resources by these ‘excess’ individuals is limited. 204 table 1. differences in population parameters (mean ± se per pool) between pupﬁsh populations held in pools with and without emigration outlets. reproduction includes gains in population numbers plus number of emigrants counted between censuses. net production refers to the average numbers produced per pool (total reproduction ) mortality) during the 22-month study. adapted from mcmahon & tash (1988). reproduction year 1 year 2 mortality net production emigration open closed 283.2 (6.7) 116.5 (60.7) 36.2 (11.8) 331.5 (56.7) 293.7 (55.3) 268.5 (23.4) 18.5 (6.5) 164.0 (29.3) 127.0 (3.6) – emigration was similar among all four open pools, occurring at high levels during summer recruitment, at very low levels during winter, and increasing sharply in early spring coinciding with rising temperature and initiation of spawning. emigration showed no direct relation to density. these patterns suggest that both environmental and behavioural cues were involved in triggering individuals to emigrate (mcmahon & tash 1988). many of the adult ﬁsh ﬁrst added to experimental pools were still present at the end of trials. this indicates that individuals whose resource needs were met did not attempt to leave open pools, but other individuals (especially young males) without access to sufﬁcient resources readily navigated the shallow-water exit. to test the link between emigration and resource availability more directly, we erected a barrier across the middle of two open pools, conﬁning the population to one half of the pool and effectively doubling the density:resource ratio. despite wide differences in initial population size, almost half (42%) of pupﬁsh emigrated from the two manipulated pools, most leaving within the ﬁrst 2 days of the 8-day trial, whereas only 16% emigrated from two control pools. these results, coupled with the consistent seasonal pattern of emigration among all four open pools, indicated that emigration was neither random, rare nor solely a product of a simple wandering response, but likely a direct response to changes in resource availability and resource demands of individual ﬁsh. but how applicable are these results to other ﬁshes? at ﬁrst glance pupﬁshes appear unique from most other ﬁshes that occur in much larger systems and as members of more diverse assemblages. however, just as the simpliﬁed environments on the galapagos islands have provided a window on the underpinnings of evolutionary processes in more complex commu- nities (weiner 1994), the small and relatively simple aquatic islands that pupﬁshes inhabit offer the oppor- tunity to observe the effects of individual behaviour on population dynamics at a level of detail typically not possible in most other systems or species. given that a diverse assortment of animals exhibit similar popula- tion responses to prevention of emigration as do pupﬁsh (mcmahon & tash 1988) and that pupﬁshes currently and in the past occurred within more diverse lakes and estuaries (miller assemblages in larger 1981), we believe that the signiﬁcant effects of emigration on population dynamics of this species are unlikely to be distinctive to this group. similar experiments with other species that inhabit ponds, small streams and other environments amenable to experimental manipulation and precise measurement of emigration and other demographic rates are needed to test the generality of our hypothesised linkage between habitat selection, emigration and population dynamics (fig. 1). measuring emigration emigration experiments with pupﬁsh and other ﬁsh species (e.g. matter et al. 1989; he & kitchell 1990; dunham et al. 2000) indicate that emigration is common, arguably more so than perhaps currently recognised, and has profound effects on population dynamics. yet the difﬁculty in reliably differentiating emigrating individuals from individuals undergoing other types of movement remains a major hurdle for assessing its causes and consequences. recent tech- nological advancements in detecting ﬁsh movement (lucas & baras 2000, 2001), along with increasing recognition of its importance in population processes at the local and landscape scale (e.g. schlosser & angermeier 1995; gowan & fausch 2002), have led to the development of a number of different designs useful for measuring the interaction among habitat selection, emigration and population dynamics in the ﬁeld, and in more controlled settings. field studies despite the large number of movement studies in ﬁshes (e.g. gowan et al. 1994; lucas & baras 2001; hilderbrand & kershner 2004), most tagging studies are unable to reliably distinguish emigration from other types of movement. seasonal migrations and daily home range movements (e.g. diana et al. 2004) could easily be confused with true emigration movements. moreover, tagged animals that move long distances from sites of tagging can confound interpretation of the effects of emigration on population dynamics and interconnec- tion among populations. however, we found several study designs (table 2) that could be tailored to differentiate local, exploratory-type movement from emigration, and to better estimate the magnitude of emigration on local and landscape-level population dynamics. low recovery of habitat selection, emigration & population dynamics he & kitchell (1990) employed an innovative design to measure the effects of a predator introduction on a prey ﬁsh assemblage in a small north american lake (table 2a). traps within the lake and within inlet and outlet tributaries measured changes in prey ﬁsh abundance and species composition in the lake and the timing and magnitude of what he & kitchell (1990) called outmigration. tributaries were small and often had unsuitable conditions in summer because of frequent oxygen depletion, and therefore movement into these sites could be distinguished from normal exploratory or home range movement in a way analogous to pupﬁsh emigration from outdoor pools described above. furthermore, the before-and-after experimental design allowed comparison of normal ‘background’ levels of outmigration to those following the predator introduction, thereby allowing a distinc- tion between a seasonal, obligative-type of emigration and true facultative emigration. the decrease in prey ﬁsh biomass due to a sharp increase in outmigration immediately following the introduction of pike (esox lucius) was at least as great as the estimated loss from direct consumption. out- migration was eight following pike introduction compared to that during the same period the previous year, supporting classiﬁcation of outmi- gration as a true emigration from the population. times greater movement of new individuals into experimentally defaunated areas is another design that could be used to assess the degree of emigration (table 2b), and is especially useful for assessing recolonisation potential and source–sink dynamics. if the removal area is large, most colonists can be assumed to primarily represent emigrants, although some animals living in home ranges adjacent to the removal area may move into the removal area. to date, this design has been deployed primarily to measure immigration rates (e.g. adams et al. 2000), and we found no studies with ﬁshes that explored the consequences to population dynamics in source and ‘sink’ (removal) habitat, nor how habitat quality in source areas inﬂuences the degree of movement, as has been the case with small mammals (gundersen et al. 2001). such studies are needed to assess how rates of emigration among source and sink patches inﬂuence spatial population dynamics within and between drainages (schlosser & angermeier 1995; travis & french 2000). movement into areas of unsuitable conditions (table 2c) is another design for measuring emigration (matter et al. 1989; nelson et al. 2002). for example, fraser et al. (1999) recorded movement of killiﬁsh (rivulus hartii) tributary with preferred habitat conditions into apparently unsuitable conditions of a main river corridor, where preferred habitat was rare and predation risk was markedly higher. presumably, individuals would enter such tagged in a small 205 mcmahon & matter table 2. types of study designs for measuring emigration in the ﬁeld and in controlled settings. design example references field studies a. comparison of within-population movement to emigration he & kitchell (1990) traps b. experimental removal–immigration adams et al. (2000) c. emigration into low quality habitat removal section good habitat (mark) poor habitat (recapture) fraser et al. (1999) d. local versus long-distance movement be´langer & rodrı´guez (2002), dananacher et al. (2004), ibbotson et al. (2004) mark-recapture or antennae sites e. retrospective analysis using hard parts individual variation in movement and effects on adult recruitment arai et al. (2003), elsdon & gillanders (2003) experiments in controlled settings f. experimental enclosures exit matter et al. (1989), armstrong et al. (1999) pit, passive integrated transponder. pit tag antennae unsuitable areas, strictly avoided by resident individ- uals, only when lack of access to resources strongly motivates them to do so (fig. 1), thereby operationally identifying themselves as emigrants. coupling this design with simultaneous measurement of local movement within the ‘source’ habitat would be an effective way to examine the relationship between habitat quality, exploratory behaviour and emigration in the ﬁeld. for example, as predicted by our model, bonte et al. (2004) found that increased rates of local movement within low quality habitat were correlated with increased emigration rates. recapture or detection of tagged ﬁsh at ﬁxed sites along a stream course have also been used to assess the degree of immigration and emigration in relation to 206 habitat quality within and between habitat patches of varying distances (be´langer & rodrı´guez 2002; dananacher et al. 2004). for example, studies with atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) and brook_trout (salvelinus_fontinalis) demonstrated that apparently preferred areas had higher immigration and residence times and lower emigration rates than less preferred areas (be´langer & rodrı´guez 2002). arrays of ‘recapture’ or ‘detection’ sites could be deployed, using individual marks, radiotags, or passive integra- ted transponder to differentiate short distance exploratory and home range movement from long-distance emigration, and for examining the rates of movement among population units. in particular, the advent of remotely deployed pit tag detecting (pit) tags, antenna technology, coupled with the opportunity to pit tag many individuals (barbin zydlewski et al. 2001; ibbotson et al. 2004), offers great promise for assessing movement of many individual ﬁsh in relation to environmental factors in real-time over both small and large spatial scales to a degree that has been nigh impossible to date. tool important chemical analysis of hard parts to retrospectively determine movement patterns of ﬁsh (table 2e) offers another for analysis of movement (thorrold et al. 2001; arai et al. 2003; elsdon & gillanders 2003). natural chemical tags can overcome some of the limitations of traditional tagging because movement and habitat use can be assessed over an entire life cycle and the contribution of different movement patterns or ‘contingents’ (secor 1999) to adult recruitment can be determined. experiments in controlled settings the use of laboratory or ﬁeld enclosures with emigration exits offers several important advantages over observational ﬁeld studies for measuring the impact of emigration on population dynamics: (i) the ability to accurately identify and enumerate emigrants and residents, (ii) direct testing of triggers to emigra- tion via manipulation of potential environmental and social factors such as ﬁsh density and resource availability, and (iii) the potential to isolate the effects of emigration from other demographic parameters (matter et al. 1989). to ensure such experiments do not produce artefactual behavioural and population responses, a common concern of controlled ecological experiments, matter et al. (1989) (see also nelson et al. 2002) set forth several key criteria that must be met. first, all test animals must have the ability to ﬁnd and use exits, thereby having the same freedom of movement available in nature: to stay when conditions are perceived as suitable and to leave when conditions are unsuitable (fig. 1). second, enclosure exits must readily allow the passage of animals with sufﬁcient motivation to emigrate (fig. 1e,h), but must be sufﬁciently challenging that residents do not inadvert- ently wander out during routine exploratory move- ments. exits that require ﬁsh to swim through narrow passageways and over a shallow shelf have proven effective at meeting these test criteria (mcmahon & tash 1988; matter et al. 1989). such controlled settings offer great potential for experimentally evaluating how variation in emigration responds to variation in habitat conditions and contri- butes to subsequent population responses to a degree not possible in ﬁeld settings. for example, such a study design could by used to experimentally evaluate the ‘movement rules’ which form the basis for individual-based models of ﬁsh population dynamics habitat selection, emigration & population dynamics (be´langer & rodrı´guez 2002; railsback & harvey 2002), and provide clearer insight into the mechanisms underlying ﬁsh movement and its consequences. we believe that simultaneously measuring within-enclo- sure movement with emigration out of an enclosure (table 2f) would be a particularly useful approach for linking individual behaviour to manipulations of resource availability and density. we found no exam- ples of studies that have adopted this design, but studies of movement of ﬁsh with pit tags within enclosures (without exits) having an array of tag- detecting antennae, attest to its potential value for measuring individual variation in exploratory beha- viour and emigration in direct relation to changes in abiotic and biotic conditions (armstrong et al. 1997, 1999; bra¨nna¨s et al. 2003). insight into the overall despite such distinct advantages, use of such ‘open’ experimental enclosures for study of ﬁsh habitat selection and emigration has been limited. direct comparison of populations ‘open’ and ‘closed’ to emigration, similar to that noted above for pupﬁsh, can yield important impact of emigration on population dynamics for a species, yet in our review of the ﬁsh ecology literature from 1988 to 2004, we found only three studies that employed this approach (mcmahon & tash 1988; dunham et al. 2000; keeley 2001). of 16 studies published during this period that used experimental enclosures in the laboratory or the ﬁeld to study habitat selection and behaviour of ﬁshes, nine (56%) were conducted in enclosures that lacked exits. as experiments by matter et al. (1989) demonstrate, affording animals the choice of staying or leaving a site is a minimal requirement of proper enclosure design; otherwise results from closed system experiments may not be truly representative of natural responses. exits enclosures in experimental emigration in many natural aquatic systems that at ﬁrst glance appear ‘closed’ to emigration (e.g. small lakes, desert springs and cave pools) may in fact be more common than realised (mcmahon & tash 1988; he & kitchell 1990), further emphasising the need to incorporate to increase conﬁdence in the ‘naturalness’ of the results from tests conducted therein. the importance of conducting habitat selection and other ﬁsh behaviour experiments in enclosures with exits is illustrated by studies of winter cover selection in juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) conducted in outdoor stream channels (mcmahon & hartman 1989). coho added to channels ﬁrst selected the lowest current velocity available during the day, but later emigrated from experimental channels at twilight unless over- head cover and woody debris were present. if enclosures had prevented emigration, behaviour of ﬁsh would have indicated that low velocity areas were preferred habitat conditions, when in fact, such 207 mcmahon & matter conditions were inadequate to trigger residency when ﬁsh had the opportunity to emigrate. conclusions linking individual decisions of ﬁsh to stay or leave a site to the larger-scale dynamics of populations over space and time poses signiﬁcant conceptual and logistical hurdles for ﬁsh ecologists. yet, overcoming such hurdles is needed to fully under- stand the consequences of movement to populations, metapopulations, and species persistence. resolving these difﬁculties requires integration of both me- (lima & chanistic zollner 1996; lidicker 2002; humston et al. 2004). our conceptual model provides a framework for understanding how resource needs and resource availability at the scale of individual ﬁsh (mechan- istic view) inﬂuences populations and population connectivity and persistence at much larger scales (contextual view). viewpoints and contextual there has been great progress in ﬁsh ecology over the past two decades in the development of hierarch- ical models that link ﬁsh habitat requirements from the small (microhabitat) to large (drainage basin) habitat scale (rabeni & sowa 1996). applications of such hierarchical models (ho¨lker & breckling 2002) of ﬁsh habitat have shown that all scales are interconnected and each provides a unique perspective for habitat conservation and management (rabeni & sowa 1996). in a similar fashion, our habitat selection-emigration model could prove proﬁtable for placing individual behaviour within the context of the temporal dynamics and spatial distribution of populations (see also humston et al. 2004). a signiﬁcant outcome of development of hierarchical perspectives is increased communication among ecologists working at different scales (lima & zollner 1996). emigration is often the key linkage between the scale of individual behaviour to the scale of population responses, and greater understanding of the underlying factors affecting this often-overlooked demographic parameter could offer new approaches for management and conservation of ﬁshes. acknowledgements this paper is dedicated to our colleague, jerry tash, who introduced us to the topic of emigration. the paper was developed from a presentation at the international conference ‘behaviour and ecology of freshwater ﬁsh: linking ecology and individual behaviour’ at the danish institute for freshwater research, silkeborg, august 2004. we thank the conference organisers for their support. the paper was improved by comments from j. tash and three anonymous reviewers. 208 references adams, s.b., frissell, c.a. & rieman, b.e. 2000. movements of nonnative brook_trout in relation stream channel slope. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 623– 638. arai, t., hayano, h., asami, h. & miyazaki, n. 2003. coexistence of anadromous and lacustrine life histories of the shirauo, salangichthys microdon. fisheries oceanography 12: 134–139. armstrong, j.d., braithwaite, v.a. & huntingford, f.a. 1997. spatial strategies of wild atlantic salmon parr: exploration and settlement in unfamiliar areas. journal of animal ecology 66: 203–211. armstrong, j.d., huntingford, f.a. & herbert, n.a. 1999. individual space use strategies of wild juvenile atlantic salmon. journal of fish biology 55: 1201–1212. barbin zydlewski, g., haro, a., whalen, k.g. & mccormick, s.d. 2001. performance of stationary and portable passive transponder detection systems for monitoring of ﬁsh move- ments. journal of fish biology 58: 1471–1475. be´langer, g. & rodrı´guez, m.a. 2002. local movement as a measure of habitat quality in stream salmonids. environ- mental biology of fishes 64: 155–164. bell, w.j. 1991. searching behaviour: the behavioural ecology of ﬁnding resources. london: chapman & hall, xii+358 pp. bonte, d., lens, l. & maelfait, j.-p. 2004. lack of homeward orientation and increased mobility result in high emigration rates from low-quality fragments in a dune wolf spider. journal of animal ecology 73: 643–650. bra¨nna¨s, e., jonsson, s. & lundqvist, h. 2003. inﬂuence of food abundance on individual behaviour strategy and growth rate in juvenile brown_trout (salmo_trutta). canadian journal of zoology 81: 684–691. dananacher, d., labonne, j., pradel, r. & gaudin, p. 2004. capture-recapture estimates of space used in streams (cresus) at the population scale: case study on zingel asper (percid), a threatened species of the rhoˆne catchment. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 476– 486. diana, j.s., hudson, j.p. & clark, r.d., jr 2004. movement patterns of large brown_trout in the mainstream au sable river, michigan. transactions of the american fisheries society 133: 34–44. doncaster, c.p. 2000. extension of the ideal free resource use to breeding populations and metapopulations. oikos 89: 24–36. dunham, j.b., dickerson, b.r., beever, e., duncan, r.d. & vinyard, g.l. 2000. effects of food limitation and emigration on self-thinning in experimental minnow cohorts. journal of animal ecology 69: 927–934. dytham, c. 2003. how landscapes affect the evolution of dispersal behaviour in reef ﬁshes: results from an individual- based model. journal of fish biology 63 (suppl. a): 213–224. elsdon, t.s. & gillanders, b.m. 2003. reconstructing migratory patterns of ﬁsh based on environmental inﬂuences on otolith chemistry. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 13: 219–235. forseth, t., næsje, t.f., jonsson, b. & ha˚rsaker, k. 1999. juvenile migration in brown_trout: a consequence of energetic state. journal of animal ecology 689: 783–793. fraser, d.f., gilliam, j.f., macgowan, m.p., arcaro, c.m. & guillozet, p.h. 1999. habitat quality in a hostile river corridor. ecology 80: 597–607. gowan, c. & fausch, k.d. 2002. why do foraging stream salmonids move during summer? environmental biology of fishes 64: 139–153. gowan, c., young, m.k., fausch, k.d. & riley, s.c. 1994. restricted movement stream salmonids: a paradigm lost? canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 51: 2626–2637. in resident grossman, g.d., hill, j. & petty, j.t. 1995. observations on habitat structure, population regulation, and habitat use with respect to evolutionarily signiﬁcant units: a landscape perspective for lotic systems. in: nielsen, j.l., ed. evolution and the aquatic ecosystem: deﬁning unique units in population conservation. bethesda, md: american fisheries society symposium 17, pp. 381–391. gundersen, g., johannesen, e., andreassen, h.p. & ims, r.a. 2001. source–sink dynamics: how sinks affect demography of sources. ecology letters 4: 14–21. hanski, i. 2001. population dynamic consequences of dispersal in local populations and in metapopulations. in: clobert, j., danchin, e., dhondt, a.a. & nichols, j.d., eds. dispersal. new york: oxford, pp. 283–298. he, x. & kitchell, j.f. 1990. direct and indirect effects of predation on a ﬁsh community: a whole-lake experiment. transactions of the american fisheries society 119: 825–835. hendry, a.p., castric, v., kinnison, m.t. & quinn, t.p. 2004. the evolution of philopatry and dispersal: homing versus straying in salmonids. in: hendry, a.p. & stearns, s.c., eds. evolution illuminated: salmon and their relatives. new york: oxford, pp. 52–91. hilderbrand, r.h. & kershner, j.l. 2004. are there differences in growth and condition between mobile and resident cutthroat the american fisheries society 133: 1042–1046. trout? transactions of ho¨lker, f. & breckling, b. 2002. concepts of scales, hierarchies and emergent properties in ecological models. in: ho¨lker, f., ed. theorie in der okologie 6. frankfort: peter lang, pp. 7–27. howard, w.e. 1960. innate and environmental dispersal of individual vertebrates. american midland naturalist 63: 152– 161. hughes, n.f. 2000. testing the ability of habitat selection theory to predict interannual movement patterns of a drift- feeding salmonid. ecology of freshwater fish 9: 4–8. humston, r., olson, d.b. & ault, j.s. 2004. behavioral assumptions in models of ﬁsh movement and their inﬂuence on population dynamics. transactions of the american fisheries society 133: 1304–1328. ibbotson, a.t., beaumont, w.r.c., colllinson, d., wilinson, a. & pinder, a.c. 2004. a cross-river antenna array for the detection of miniature passive integrated transponder tags in deep, fast ﬂowing rivers. journal of fish biology 65: 1441– 1443. ims, r.a. & hjermann, d.o. 2001. condition-dependent dispersal. in: clobert, j., danchin, e., dhondt, a.a. & nichols, j.d., eds. dispersal. new york: oxford, pp. 203– 216. jakober, m.j., mcmahon, t.e., thurow, r.f. & clancy, c.c. 1998. role of stream ice on fall and winter movements and habitat selection, emigration & population dynamics habitat use by bull in montana headwater streams. transactions of the american fisheries society 127: 223–235. trout and cutthroat trout keeley, e.r. 2001. demographic responses to food and space competition by juvenile steelhead trout. ecology 82: 1247– 1259. kisdi, e´ . 2002. dispersal: risk spreading versus local adapta- tion. the american naturalist 159: 579–596. kramer, d.l., rangeley, r.w. & chapman, l.j. 1997. habitat selection: patterns of spatial distribution from behavioural decisions. in: godin, j.-g.j., ed. behavioural ecology of teleost ﬁshes. new york: oxford, pp. 37–80. kristan, w.b., iii 2003. the role of habitat selection behavior in population dynamics: source-sink systems and ecological traps. oikos 103: 457–468. kritzer, j.p. & sale, p.f. 2004. metapopulation ecology in the sea: from levins’ model to marine ecology and ﬁsheries science. fish and fisheries 5: 131–140. lidicker, w.z., jr 2002. from dispersal to landscapes: progress in the understanding of population dynamics. acta therio- loogica 47 (suppl. 1): 23–37. lidicker, w.z. & stenseth, n.c. 1992. to disperse or not to disperse: who does it and why? in: stenseth, n.c. & lidicker, w.z., ed. animal dispersal. new york: chapman & hall, pp. 21–36. lima, s.l. & zollner, p.a. 1996. towards a behavioral ecology of ecological landscapes. trends in ecology and evolution 11: 131–135. lomnicki, a. 1988. population ecology of individuals. mon- ographs in population biology 25. princeton, nj: princeton university press, x+223 pp. lowe, w.h. 2003. linking dispersal to local population dynamics: a case study using a headwater salamander system. ecology 84: 2145–2154. lucas, m.c. & baras, e. 2000. methods for studying spatial behaviour of freshwater ﬁshes in the natural environment. fish and fisheries 1: 283–316. lucas, m.c. & baras, e. 2001. migration of freshwater ﬁshes. oxford: blackwell science, xvii+420 pp. massot, m., clobert, j., lorenzon, p. & rossi, j.-m. 2002. condition-dependent dispersal and ontogeny of the dispersal behaviour: an experimental approach. journal of animal ecology 71: 253–261. matter, w.j., mannan, r.w., bianchi, e.w., mcmahon, t.e., menke, j.h. & tash, j.c. 1989. a laboratory approach for studying emigration. ecology 70: 1543–1546. mcmahon, t.e. & hartman, g.f. 1989. inﬂuence of cover complexity and current velocity on winter habitat use by juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 46: 1551–1557. mcmahon, t.e. & tash, j.c. 1988. experimental analysis of the role of emigration in population regulation of desert pupﬁsh. ecology 69: 1871–1883. miller, r.r. 1981. coevolution of deserts and pupﬁshes (genus cyprinodon) in the american southwest. in: naiman, r.j. & soltz, d.l., eds. fishes in north american deserts. new york: wiley, pp. 39–94. nathan, r. 2001. the challenges of studying dispersal. trends in ecology and evolution 16: 481–483. 209 mcmahon & matter nelson, a.r., johnson, c.l., matter, w.j. & mannan, r.w. 2002. tests of emigration in small mammals under experi- mental conditions. canadian journal of zoology 80: 2056– 2060. rabeni, c.f. & sowa, s.p. 1996. integrating biological realism into habitat restoration and conservation strategies for small streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 53 (suppl. 1): 252–259. railsback, s.f. & harvey b.c. 2002. analysis of habitat- selection rules using an individual-based model. ecology 83: 1817–1830. riehle, m.d. & grifﬁth, j.s. 1993. changes in habitat use and feeding chronology of juvenile rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) in fall and the onset of winter in silver creek, idaho. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 50: 2119–2128. riley, s.c. & fausch, k.d. 1995. trout population response to habitat manipulation in six northern colorado streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 52: 34–53. rodrı´guez, m.a. 2002. restricted movement of stream ﬁsh: the paradigm is incomplete, not lost. ecology 83: 1–13. sale, p.f. 1969a. a suggested mechanism for habitat selection by the juvenile manini, acanthurus triostegus sandvicensis streets. behaviour 35: 27–44. sale, p.f. 1969b. pertinent stimuli for habitat selection by the juvenile manini, acanthurus triostegus sandvicensis. ecology 54: 616–623. schlosser, i.j. & angermeier, p.l. 1995. spatial variation in demographic processes of lotic ﬁshes: conceptual models, empirical evidence, and implications for conservation. in: nielsen, j.l., ed. evolution and the aquatic ecosystem: deﬁning unique units in population conservation. bethesda, md: american fisheries society symposium 17, pp. 392– 401. secor, d.h. 1999. specifying divergent migrations in the the contingent hypothesis. fisheries concept of stock: research 43: 13–34. smithson, e.b. & johnston, c.e. 1999. movement patterns of stream ﬁshes in a ouachita highlands stream: an examination of the restricted movement paradigm. transactions of the american fisheries society 128: 847–853. sutherland, w.j. 1996. from individual behaviour to population ecology. new york: oxford, x+213 pp. thorpe, j.e., mangel, m., metcalfe, n.b. & huntingford, f.a. 1998. modelling the proximate basis of salmonid life-history variation, with application to atlantic salmon, salmo_salar l. evolutionary ecology 12: 581–599. thorrold, s.r., latkoczy, c., swart, p.k. & jones, c.m. 2001. natal homing in a marine ﬁsh metapopulation. science 291: 297–299. travis, j.m.j. & french, d.r. 2000. dispersal functions and spatial models: expanding our dispersal toolbox. ecology letters 3: 163–165. weiner, j. 1994. the beak of the ﬁnch: a story of evolution in our time. new york: knopf, x+332 pp. winker, k., rappole, j.h. & ramos, m.a. 1995. the use of movement data as an assay of habitat quality. oecologia 101: 211–216. 210  