ecology of freshwater fish 2010: 19: 390–400 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2010 john wiley & sons a/s ecology of freshwater fish life history trait diversity of native freshwater ﬁshes in north america mims mc, olden jd, shattuck zr, poff nl. life history trait diversity of native freshwater ﬁshes in north america. ecology of freshwater fish 2010: 19: 390–400. ó 2010 john wiley & sons a ⁄ s abstract – freshwater ﬁsh diversity is shaped by phylogenetic constraints acting on related taxa and biogeographic constraints operating on regional species pools. in the present study, we use a trait-based approach to examine taxonomic and biogeographic patterns of life history diversity of freshwater ﬁshes in north america (exclusive of mexico). multivariate analysis revealed strong support for a tri-lateral continuum model with three end-point strategies deﬁning the equilibrium (low fecundity, high juvenile survivorship), opportunistic (early maturation, low juvenile survivorship), and periodic (late maturation, high fecundity, low juvenile survivorship) life histories. trait composition and diversity varied greatly between and within major families. finally, we used occurrence data for large watersheds (n = 350) throughout the united states and canada to examine geographic patterns of life history variation. distinct patterns of life history strategies were discernible and deemed congruent with biogeographic processes and selection pressures acting on life history strategies of freshwater ﬁshes throughout north america. m. c. mims1, j. d. olden1, z. r. shattuck2, n. l. poff3 1school of aquatic and fishery sciences, uni- versity of washington, seattle, wa, usa, 2department of biology, aquatic station, texas state university-san marcos, 601 university drive, san marcos, tx, usa, 3graduate degree program in ecology, department of biology, colorado state university, fort collins, co, usa key words: life history strategies; traits; func- tional diversity; freshwater ﬁshes; north america meryl c. mims, school of aquatic and fishery sciences, university of washington, 1122 ne boat street, seattle, wa 98195, usa; e-mail: mmims@uw.edu accepted for publication march 15, 2010 introduction freshwater ﬁshes are among the most diverse groups of vertebrates in the world, exhibiting extraordinary taxonomic breadth, endemism, and geographic scope in their distribution (le´veˆque et al. 2008). rivalling the taxonomic diversity of freshwater ﬁshes is the wide range of morphological, behavioural, and life history attributes that characterise the constituent species. the rich taxonomic and functional diversity of freshwater ﬁshes stem largely from the fact that streams, rivers, lakes, and wetlands are embedded in terrestrial the dispersal of freshwater organisms by promoting habitat isolation (darlington 1948; berra 2007). this has resulted in biogeographic islands of habitat (water) in which the function and form of freshwater ﬁsh species represent the product of differential selection pressures in response to a diverse array of environmental drivers operating across multiple temporal and spatial scales (hugueny et al. 2010). landscapes which limit there is a long history of scientiﬁc inquiry into patterns of trait diversity in freshwater ﬁshes. some notable efforts include those of breder & rosen (1966), who were the ﬁrst to provide a comprehensive catalogue summarising the reproductive characteristics of most ﬁshes. balon’s (1975) description of the evolution of ﬁsh reproductive guilds remains the prime classiﬁcation of ﬁsh reproductive strategies. guilds were further explored by wootton (1984), who compiled data on size at maturity, fecundity, egg size, and a number of other reproductive traits for canadian freshwater ﬁshes. these efforts were followed by winemiller (1989, 1992) who used life history theory to develop a holistic perspective of linkages between ﬁsh traits and environmental gradients. most recently, welcomme et al. (2006) deﬁned environmental guilds of freshwater ﬁshes (using reproductive, behavioural, and ecological traits) as a tool for riverine ecological assessment, and frimpong & angermeier (2009) presented a database of ecological and life history traits of freshwater ﬁshes of the united states. the ecology of freshwater ﬁshes has predominantly been studied according to taxonomy (jackson et al. 2001), but over the past two decades ecologists have increasingly supported the idea that traits, not species 390 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2010.00422.x (olden et al. 2010). the essential entities, may be a more insightful currency of investigation trait-based approaches in basic and applied research offer a framework for mechanistically linking species traits to major environmental drivers that inﬂuence organism ﬁtness or performance (mcgill et al. 2006). this is supported by the habitat template (templet) model of southwood (1977, 1988) and life history theory (pianka 1970; stearns 1992) that predicts that envi- ronments favour speciﬁc suites of traits, resulting in the evolution of life history strategies or tactics that enable a species to cope with a range of ecological problems. winemiller & rose (1992) identiﬁed three primary life history strategies in freshwater ﬁshes that represent trade-offs among the basic demographic parameters of survival, fecundity, and onset and duration of reproduction (fig. 1). opportu- nistic strategists are small-bodied species with early maturation and low juvenile survivorship and are associated with habitats with frequent and intense disturbance. equilibrium strategists are typically small to medium in body size with moderate age at maturation (relative to other freshwater ﬁsh species), low fecundity per spawning event, and high juvenile survivorship largely associated with high parental care and small clutch size. they are predicted to be favoured in more stable habitats with low environ- mental variation. periodic strategists are characterised by larger body size, late maturation, high fecundity, and low juvenile survivorship and are often associated with highly periodic (seasonal) environments. the three life history strategies of the continuum can be interpreted as being adaptive with respect to relative variability and predictability of environmental regimes (winemiller 2005; fig. 1). the traits-based perspective presents a powerful paradigm for ﬁsh ecology and has gained momentum increasing scale and predictability in spatiotemporal variability of resources and mortality factors opportunistic periodic juvenile n a ti o r e n e g y t i d n u c e f ti m e survivorship increasing resource stability, competition and predation equilibrium increasing environmental disturbance, decreasing predictability in spatiotemporal variability of resources and mortality factors fig. 1. life history continuum model adapted from winemiller (2005) and originally conceptualised in winemiller & rose (1992). inside arrows summarise fundamental trade-offs between juvenile survivorship, generation time, and fecundity that deﬁne the three end-point strategies. outside arrows summarise how selection pressures may favour certain strategies in relation to biotic and abiotic factors. life histories of north american freshwater ﬁshes relationships at in its application in recent years. when investigating ﬁsh community-environment large spatial scales, a trait analysis facilitates the comparison of species compositions that naturally differ due to biogeographic constraints on regional species pools (e.g., vila-gispert et al. 2002; tedesco & hugueny 2006; tedesco et al. 2008; iban˜ez et al. 2009). this allows for comparisons of species from disparate geographies where strategies and adaptations are hypothesised to converge across diverse taxonomies (lamouroux et al. 2002; irz et al. 2007; olden & kennard 2010). understanding life history strategies of organisms also goes beyond ecological theory to practical application. under a particular set of envi- ronmental selective forces, speciﬁc combinations of traits (strategies) will be favoured in a given popula- tion. for example, the trait compositions of ﬁsh assemblages have been linked to hydrologic variability (e.g., poff & allan 1995), habitat alteration (e.g., goldstein & meador 2005) and climate change (e.g., daufresne et al. 2003), and species traits have been predictive of ﬁsh extinctions and invasions (e.g., angermeier 1995; garcı´a-berthou 2007; olden et al. 2008). the relationships between environmental selec- tive forces and trait compositions of freshwater ﬁsh assemblages provide a basis to develop predictive models to help conserve native species and create risk- assessment protocols for non-native ﬁshes based on generalised population dynamics and responses to environmental conditions (king & mcfarlane 2003; winemiller 2005; welcomme et al. 2006). trait-based approaches may also provide the power to elucidate the effects of multiple environmental stressors, as has been shown for invertebrates in lotic ecosystems (statzner & beˆche 2010). a necessary precursor to the advancement of trait- based studies in ﬁsh ecology is to develop and explore large databases containing ecological and biological traits of species representing a diverse taxonomy. we address this challenge in the present study by exam- ining the taxonomic and geographic patterns of life history trait variation in virtually all freshwater ﬁsh species of north america exclusive of mexico. first, we report on the development of a trait database for 1054 native and non-native ﬁsh species of north america according to attributes describing species morphology, reproductive ecology, life history, trophic ecology, and habitat preferences. next, using a subset of these traits we explore patterns in life history variation among major families of native freshwater ﬁshes. we then assess the life history model of winemiller & rose (1992) by asking whether north american ﬁshes conform to the opportunistic-peri- odic-equilibrium trichotomy of life history strategies. finally, we examine and compare geographic vari- ability in the distribution of life history strategies 391 mims et al. according to 350 watersheds in the united states and canada. table 1. families of freshwater ﬁshes included in this study. family code species count >3 trait (count) >3 trait (% orig.) materials and methods database of ﬁsh life history traits we developed a trait database for 1054 native and non- native species of freshwater ﬁshes found in the united states and canada (according to nelson et al. 2004; references available upon request from jdo). we deﬁned a freshwater ﬁsh broadly to include those species that can reproduce in freshwater and diadro- mous species that spend the majority of their lives in freshwaters. we excluded numerous species with strong marine or estuarine afﬁnities that may enter freshwaters for only short periods of time. data were collected for 15 biological (comprising morphological, physiological, and life history traits) and ecological (comprising environmental preferences and associated behaviours) traits that could be justiﬁed on the basis of our current knowledge and information available for the majority of species pools. trait values were represented by ordinal, nominal, or continuous data. ordinal and nominal traits were assigned a single state based on a majority of evidence rule according to adult preferences, and median values for continuous traits were used when ranges were presented. trait values for age and length at maturation were recorded for female specimens when possible. trait assignments were based on a multi-tiered data collection procedure, where a variety of sources were queried in the following order: (i) species accounts in state, provin- cial, and regional ﬁsh accounts (i.e., ‘the ﬁshes of…’); (ii) species descriptions from the primary literature, state agency reports, university reports, and graduate theses; (iii) data from reputable electronic databases; and (iv) targeted search of the world wide web using the google scholartm search engine. web searches were conducted for each species using their scientiﬁc name as a search query, and all results up through the 80th entry were examined. for species that produced considerably fewer results (<10 records), a new search was conducted using the appropriate common name or other possible ‘older’ nomenclature. in total, over 300 texts, articles, reports, theses and web sources were used to obtain trait values. in the present study we focused on the trait diversity of the native species of freshwater ﬁshes (777 species, 32 families, 138 genera, table 1) according to seven life history attributes describing the co-evolution of traits associated with reproduction. the life history traits included maximum length, length at maturation, longevity, age at maturation, total fecundity, egg size (mean diameter of mature, fully yolked ovarian oocytes), and parental care following winemiller 392 fund cato cent acipenseridae amblyopsidae amiidae anguillidae aphredoderidae catostomidae centrarchidae characidae clupeidae cottidae cyprinidae cyprinodontidae cypt elassomatidae esocidae fundulidae gadidae gasterosteidae goodeidae hiodontidae ictaluridae lepisosteidae moronidae mugilidae osmeridae percidae percopsidae petromyzontidae petr poeciliidae poec polyodontidae salmonidae syngnathidae umbridae 7 6 1 1 1 62 31 1 8 27 cott cypr 250 15 6 4 32 2 4 3 2 39 5 4 1 4 perc 184 2 18 14 1 salm 36 2 4 icta 7 6 1 1 1 53 29 1 8 19 176 13 5 4 26 2 4 2 2 33 4 4 0 4 127 2 18 10 1 34 2 4 100 100 100 100 100 85 94 100 100 70 70 87 83 100 81 100 100 67 100 85 80 100 0 100 69 100 100 71 100 94 100 100 species count indicates the number of species of each family included in original dataset of 777 species. species count with greater than three traits shows the number of species in each family with at least four of the 7 life history traits. the far right column indicates the percent of species with 4 or more traits of the number of species originally included in the dataset. bold font indicates the 11 families highlighted in the pcoa analysis by family code. (1989) (table 2). parental care was quantiﬁed as the rxi for i = 1–3, where x1 = 0 if no special placement of zygotes, x1 = 1 if special placement of zygotes, x1 = 2 if both zygotes and larvae maintained in nest, x2 = 0 if no parental protection of zygotes or larvae, x2 = 1 if brief period of protection by one sex (<1 month), x2 = 2 if long period of protection by one sex (>1 month) or brief care by both sexes, x2 = 4 or lengthy protection by both sexes (>1 month), x3 = 0 if no nutritional contribution to larvae, x3 = 2 if brief period of nutritional contribution to larvae (<1 month), x3 = 4 if long period of nutritional contribution to larvae (1–2 months), and x3 = 8 if extremely long period larvae (>2 months). contribution nutritional of to life history trait diversity we ﬁrst evaluated the ﬁsh life history continuum model of winemiller & rose (1992) by plotting species’ positions in relation to three life history life histories of north american freshwater ﬁshes table 2. seven continuous life history traits with descriptions and summary statistics including mean, minimum (min), maximum (max), and standard deviation (sd). trait description maxbodyl lenmat longevi agemat fecund eggsize parentalc maximum total length (mm) mean length at maturation (mm) maximum potential longevity or lifespan (years) mean age at maturation (years) total fecundity (number of eggs or offspring) per spawning season per female mean diameter of mature, fully yolked ovarian oocytes (mm) degree of parental care based on placement of zygotes, parental protection, and nutritional contribution (see text for deﬁnition) mean 256.1 128.6 7.9 2.5 36442.1 1.7 1.2 min 25.0 16.0 1.0 0.1 6.0 0.2 0.0 max sd 4030.0 2440.0 154.0 22.5 2280000.0 6.5 5.0 378.0 187.3 10.7 2.3 173122.7 1.0 1.2 ln(fecundity), sub-set of axes: ln(length at maturation), and ln(egg size +1) + ln(parental care +1). this analysis was performed for 372 native species with reported values for fecundity, length at maturation, egg size, and parental care. this species was representative across families. we also summarised life history trait variation within and among species by conducting a principal coordinate analysis (pcoa) on the species-by-trait matrix. pcoa is a statistical methodology to explore and visualise similarities ⁄ dis- similarities in multivariate data by optimally repre- senting the variability of a multidimensional data matrix in ordination space with reduced dimension- ality (legendre & legendre 1998). a species simi- larity matrix of the seven continuous life history traits was constructed for the 603 native species with ‡4 traits. all traits except parental care were log- transformed to help achieve multivariate normality, and all major families were evenly represented (table 1). trait similarity was calculated according to gower’s (gower 1971). gower’s coefﬁcient is a metric able to accommodate missing values, an important property for our anal- ysis given the lack of scientiﬁc knowledge of all trait values for all species. statistical signiﬁcance of the principal coordinates (eigenvalues) and trait contri- butions (eigenvectors) were assessed using monte carlo randomisation (9,999 permutations). similarity coefﬁcient we examined family differences in species life history trait composition by employing distlm: distance-based multivariate analysis for a linear model that can be performed on any symmetric distance matrix, and whose statistical signiﬁcance is tested by permutation (mcardle & anderson 2001). distance- based multivariate linear regression addresses two major challenges of nonparametric multivariate anal- ysis of ecological data: (i) partitioning the variability in the data according to a complex design or model, and (ii) the analysis is based on a multivariate distance measure (such as gower’s) that is reasonable for ecological data. included in this analysis were only those families with 14 or more species (11 families in total; table 1). distlm is capable of handling unbalanced designs making it an appropriate statistical approach for our study with family group sizes ranging from 14 to 250 species. we tested for family group differences in multivar- iate trait variation using permdisp2, a permutational test for homogeneity of multivariate dispersions (anderson 2006). this method is a multivariate analogue to the univariate levene’s test and is ﬂexible because it can be based on any ecologically-relevant dissimilarity measure. this test computes an f-statistic to compare the average distance from an individual sample score (species) to the group (family) centroid deﬁned by the principal coordinate (pc) space of a chosen dissimilarity measure (in our case, gower’s dissimilarity) and then permutes the appropriate least- squares residuals to estimate statistical signiﬁcance. all data transformations and analyses were performed in r using the vegan library (r development core team 2008). geographic patterns in life history strategy composition we assembled present-day occurrence data for native ﬁshes in 350 watersheds of the united states and canada according to the u.s. geological survey 4- digit catalog unit (natureserve 2004) and canadian watersheds compiled by n. e. mandrak (great lakes laboratory for fisheries and aquatic sciences, department of fisheries and oceans, canada). data sources included the scientiﬁc literature, u.s. state natural heritage programs, and questionnaires sent to biologists working at federal, state, and provincial agencies, universities, and museums. this dataset represents the most complete distributional informa- tion possible for these species at the level of sub- watershed in the u.s. and canada. occurrence data was unavailable for alaska. although watersheds of the great lakes were included, the great lakes proper were excluded from the geographic analysis. the percentages of species assigned to each of the three life history strategies were mapped for north american watersheds. the process of assigning a species to a life history strategy can involve a hard classiﬁcation into a single strategy or a soft classiﬁ- cation according to a species’ relative afﬁnity toward 393 mims et al. each strategy (olden & kennard 2010). to illustrate large-scale geographic patterns of life history strate- gies, we chose to hard-assign each species to one of the three life history strategies by calculating the euclidean distance in trivariate life history space between the species’ position and the strategy end- points and designating the species to the closest strategy. strategy endpoints were deﬁned as the following: opportunistic (minimum fecundity, mini- mum juvenile investment, and minimum maturation size), periodic (maximum fecundity, minimum juve- nile investment, and maximum maturation size), and equilibrium (mean fecundity, maximum juvenile investment, and maximum maturation size). this calculation was based on normalised trait values (i.e., standardised range between 0 and 1 for each trait) to ensure equal contributions for the three life history parameters. a preliminary data analyses found a strong correlation between values based on hard and soft assignments for opportunists (r = 0.932, p < 0.001), periodic strategists (r = 0.879, p < 0.001), and equilibrium strategists (r = 0.894, p < 0.001); see also olden & kennard (2010). ternary plots were used to compare the life history composition of 8 major drainage basins to explore between- and within-basin geographic trends of dom- inant life history strategies. these basins included the yukon, western and northern hudson bay, paciﬁc northwest of the united states, missouri, new england, lower colorado, texas-gulf coastal rivers, and south atlantic-gulf. these major drainages were selected because they represent disparate geographic regions with differing climates, geomorphology, hydrology and zoogeographic histories. results life history trait variation we found strong conformity of north american freshwater ﬁshes to the life history continuum model of winemiller & rose (1992), where opportunistic, periodic and equilibrium life history strategies are deﬁned by trade-offs between generation time (length at maturation), fecundity and juvenile survivorship (investment per progeny) (fig. 2a). the ﬁsh fauna was well deﬁned by a triangular adaptive surface where a two-dimensional linear plane showed a strong statis- to the data (fig. 2b, pearson’s r = 0.85, tical ﬁt n = 372, p < 0.0001). the trilateral life history model is also supported by the multivariate analysis of 603 freshwater ﬁsh species (fig. 3). ordination of ﬁsh species according to seven life history attributes revealed two major gradients of trait variation represented by the ﬁrst two pcoa axes which explained 57.8% and 15.3% of variation, 394 fig. 2. life history diversity of 372 freshwater ﬁsh species from the united states and canada. (a) species are located on a two- dimensional triangular surface, embedded in the three-dimensional space established by three axes: ln(fecundity), ln(length at matu- ration), and ln(egg size +1) + ln(parental care +1). the vertices of the surface deﬁne three endpoint strategies: opportunistic, periodic, and equilibrium; intermediate strategies are recognised within the gradient of life histories. (b) a three-dimensional linear plane ﬁtted to all species (pearson’s r = 0.85, n = 372, p < 0.0001). (both signiﬁcant statistically respectively at p < 0.001 based on monte carlo randomisation). the ﬁrst pc revealed a gradient from periodic strategists (i.e., relatively larger species with a long life span, later maturation, and high fecundity) asso- ciated with negative scores to opportunistic strategists (i.e., relatively smaller species with a short life span, earlier maturation, and low fecundity) with positive scores. the second pc distinguishes species exhibiting high parental care and large egg size with positive scores (i.e., equilibrium strategists), from species showing minimal parental care and smaller egg size with negative scores (fig. 3a,b). (a) 4 . 0 3 . 0 2 . 0 1 . 0 0 . 0 1 . 0 – 2 . 0 – 3 . 0 – ) % 3 . 5 1 ( i i c p (b) life histories of north american freshwater ﬁshes icta poec cott cent petr cato salm cypr cypt perc fund –0.4 –0.2 0.0 pci (57.8%) 0.2 0.4 eggsize equilibrium parentc fig. 3. principal coordinate analysis (pc- oa) of 603 freshwater ﬁsh species according to seven life history traits for (a) 11 major family groups (abbreviations from table 1) within 95% conﬁdence intervals. (b) eigen- vector plots of traits, and multivariate position of the three end-point strategies based on trait correlations. maxbodyl longevi agemat lengmat periodic fecund i i c p opportunistic pci higher-level taxonomic patterns in life history trait variation are evident by examining the position of ﬁsh families in multivariate space (fig. 3a). ninety-ﬁve percent conﬁdence ellipses for each family group show a wide range of variation between family groups with some families exhibiting low life history diversity and others spanning much of the trait ordination space. differences in family trait composition are supported by the test of between-group dispersion, or group location in multivariate space, which revealed statis- tically signiﬁcant separation in trait composition (distlm, f = 4.55 for centroids, f = 3.75 for spatial medians, p < 0.001). this result is expected consid- ering the large differences between some family groups in multivariate space. for example, poeciliidae exhibited the highest scores for pci and relatively high scores for pc ii (fig. 3a) and is associated with higher parental care (fig. 3b). by contrast, salmonidae had some of the lowest scores along pc i and both positive and negative scores along pc ii (fig. 3a), which correlate with a suite of traits including high fecundity, high age at maturation, and a long life-span (longev- ity) (fig. 3b). other families exhibited limited sepa- ration in multivariate location (e.g., cyprinidae and percidae). within-group dispersion varied among (permdisp2, f = 4.14, family groups as well p < 0.001). species in the families cottidae, fundu- lidae and petromyzontidae exhibited the least varia- tion, whereas cyprinidae and ictaluridae displayed the highest diversity in trait composition. geographic patterns in life history strategy composition we found marked geographic patterns in the life history composition of watersheds across north america (fig. 4). latitudinal and longitudinal patterns across watersheds were discernable as were patterns associated with large topographic features such as coastlines and major mountain ranges, indicating that broad-scale zoogeographic processes have played a major role in shaping patterns of life history diversity. the opportunistic strategy was most prevalent in ﬁsh 395 mims et al. (a) (b) (c) fig. 4. life history composition of freshwater ﬁsh species for 350 north american watersheds according to the percentage of species assigned to each life history: (a) opportunistic, (b) periodic, and (c) equilibrium. shading has ﬁve levels that indicate 20th percentile increments of life history strategy representation for each panel. species are hard assigned to a single life history strategy, and percent strategy representation in each watershed is calculated by species occurrence. hatched area indicates watersheds not included in the analysis due to a combination of lack of trait data and lack of species occurrence data. faunas throughout the southeast of the continent with cyprinidae and percidae families (the majority of which were classiﬁed as opportunists) dominating these watersheds. in addition, watersheds of the lower colorado river, rio grande, arkansas, white and red rivers, upper mississippi and missouri rivers, tributaries of the great lakes, saskatchewan river, 396 peace river and tributaries of southern hudson bay were characterised by greater percentages of opportu- nistic species (figs 4a and 5a). the presence of species with the opportunistic strategy generally declined toward the north and west (with notable exceptions listed above) where watersheds were for the most part dominated by periodic and equilibrium species. the dominance of periodic strategists varied from relatively low in the southeastern united states to high in more western and northern watersheds with the presence of catostomidae and periodic represen- tatives from other families (fig. 4b). watersheds illustrating the highest proportion of periodic strate- gists include the upper and lower colorado river, churchill, thelon and la grande rivers of the hudson bay basin, atlantic coastal rivers in the new england region, and rivers draining the beaufort (sea) basin, including the yukon, mackenzie and great slave lake watersheds (figs 4b and 5a,b). equilibrium strategists were the dominant life history strategy in watersheds of the paciﬁc coast (largely because many salmonidae species which dominate these watersheds were classiﬁed as equilibrium strat- egists) as well as in northern latitudes, including rivers draining the canadian arctic archipelago, and the churchill and koksoak rivers ﬂowing to the labra- dor sea of the atlantic ocean (fig. 4c). the equilib- rium strategy also dominated watersheds in the texas gulf (e.g., neches, trinity, brazos, colorado and nueces rivers) primarily due to the presence of the families ictaluridae and centrarchidae (fig. 5a). this strategy was notably absent from the rocky mountain region and in arid watersheds of the southwest. although we highlighted basins above that are dominated by particular strategies, we also observed relatively even contributions from each strategy (e.g., select basins in the paciﬁc northwest and new england region; fig. 5b). discussion in recent years, there has been growing interest in the functional traits – characteristics of an organism that are linked with its ﬁtness or performance – of freshwater ﬁshes. the study of species trait distribu- tions can be used to understand complex phenomena, including why ﬁsh live where they do, how many taxa can coexist in a place, and how they will respond to environmental change (winemiller 2005; olden et al. 2010). the development and exploration of large trait databases such as the one reported in this study and the database recently presented by frimpong & anger- meier step forward in advancing trait-based approaches to ﬁsh ecology. both the taxonomic (603 ﬁsh species across 138 genera and (2009) are an important (a) (b) fig. 5. ternary plots illustrating for freshwater ﬁsh species the relative proportion of opportunistic, periodic, and equilibrium strategists in major drainage basins in the united states and canada. data points in ternary plots represent watersheds within major drainage basins (different symbols). drainages are divided into two ternary plots (a and b) arbitrarily for easier viewing. 32 families) and geographic (350 watersheds across north america) scale examined in this study are unprecedented, insomuch that this study provides the ﬁrst analysis of coupled taxonomic and geographic patterns of life-history trait variation of a continental ﬁsh fauna. major families of freshwater ﬁshes exhibited both between- and within-family variation in functional composition as depicted in our multivariate trait analysis. a number of families exhibited a strong association with a particular strategy. these included killiﬁsh (cyprinodontidae) and topminnows (fundu- lidae) that were dominated by ﬁsh displaying the opportunistic strategy (early maturation, small-bodied, short-lived individuals), salmon and trout (salmoni- dae) and suckers (catostomidae) that were primarily associated with the periodic strategy (late maturing, life histories of north american freshwater ﬁshes large-bodied, long-lived, highly fecund individuals), and the catﬁshes (ictaluridae) and sunﬁshes (centr- archidae) that were mostly equilibrium strategists (high parental care, large egg size, medium body-size, and medium maturation age). although numerous families were associated with a single dominant life history strategy, others had more variation in their composition. included in these was cyprinidae, the largest family of freshwater ﬁshes, which encompass species considered to be opportunistic (e.g., chubs, daces, shiners), periodic (e.g., pikeminnows) and intermediate between periodic and equilibrium (e.g., carp). other diverse families included percidae con- taining darters (opportunistic and periodic) and perches (equilibrium) and ictaluridae containing mad- toms (opportunistic) and bullheads and catﬁshes (equilibrium). overall, our analysis revealed that family-level associations with life history strategies both exist and are variable among freshwater ﬁshes of north america. in agreement with previous studies we found signiﬁcant support for the three-strategy life history continuum model of winemiller & rose (1992), where opportunistic, periodic and equilibrium life history strategies are deﬁned by trade-offs between generation time, fecundity and juvenile survivorship (winemiller 1989; vila-gispert & moreno-amich 2002; vila- gispert et al. 2002; king & mcfarlane 2003; ero¨s 2005; olden et al. 2006). an important consideration for the life history model of winemiller & rose (1992) is that trait variation (and hence trade-offs among these traits) is continuous – therefore strategies intermediate of the three end-points are expected. we found support for the continuous nature of trade-offs between the three end-point strategies, rather than large clusters of species near the end-point strategies. consequently, we highlight the fact that species life history strategies can be assigned in one of two ways. according to a ‘soft’ assignment, each species can be characterised by its degree (percentage) of similarity to each strategy, for example by calculating a species multivariate trait distance to each end-point strategy. alternatively, a ‘hard’ assignment involves allocating each species into a single life history strategy according to the minimum multivariate trait distance to each end-point strategy. soft life history assignments are advantageous because they provide a more realistic depiction of most species that fall intermediately between two or three strategies and thus cannot be easily assigned to a single strategy (see fig. 2). however, when examining life history trends across basins, we found a strong correlation between values based on hard and soft assignments (see also olden & kennard 2010). to illustrate large- scale geographic patterns of life history strategies, we chose to use hard assignments to generate three distinct groups (see fig. 4). 397 mims et al. we found that life history strategies of freshwater ﬁshes exhibit geographic patterns consistent with regional climatic regimes (i.e., latitudinal gradients) and past historical events in north america. in general, we observed a latitudinal gradient of smal- ler-bodied, short-lived species (generally opportunistic strategists) at low latitudes to large-bodied, longer- lived species (generally periodic equilibrium strate- gists) at high latitudes. this is in agreement with previous correlations between increasing latitude and larger-bodied species with a longer time to maturity (vila-gispert et al. 2002; blank & lamouroux 2007). found similar studies that least and bound the reproduction (e.g., selective pressures of historical processes both limits of present-day inﬂuence species diversity, and it is thus important to consider the trends we observe in light of past selective events (jackson & harvey 1989; mandrak 1995; magnuson et al. 1998; jackson et al. 2001). the geographic trends in life-history variation observed in this study are explained at in part by selective extinctions during the pleistocene glacia- tions (moyle & herbold 1987; mahon 1984; irz et al. 2007). freshwater ﬁshes in northern drainages (present-day canada and the northern-most portion of the united states) and further south along the rocky mountains were either forced to migrate or faced extinction from glaciation events during the pleistocene (smith 1981). along the west coast, glaciation selected for periodic strategists capable of migrating large distances to more suitable environ- ments and able to persist through conditions unsuit- able for successful long-lived species) (moyle & herbold 1987). our results are congruent with this theory as we found that the western drainages were dominated by equilibrium strategists along the coast and by periodic strategists further inland along the rocky mountains. the mississippi and missouri drainages as well as river basins at lower latitudes, particularly along the east remained largely unglaciated during the coast, pleistocene. however, in these drainages were subjected to extreme conditions including habitat desiccation and variable hydrologic regimes that resulted in repeated episodes of habitat isolation, ﬁsh recolonisation and community assem- bly. the species with opportunistic life histories were better able to capitalise on these conditions and exhibit long-term persistence in these environments (mahon 1984; moyle & herbold 1987). our geo- graphic investigation of life history variation sup- ports this theory as we found that the prevalence of the opportunistic life history was generally highest in the southeastern portion of the continent. it is also worth noting the dominance of the opportunistic strategy in basins of the desert southwest where freshwater ﬁshes 398 small-bodied species capable of rapid colonisation are typical (fig. 4a) (olden et al. 2006). throughout studied, especially because traits of although trait-based approaches have witnessed greater attention in recent years, their application is not without limitations. it is possible that some trade-offs may not be detectable with the given suite of adult traits some species, particularly trophic or behavioural traits, can differ the lifecycle (mccann 1998). although trait-based approaches (and their associated statistical analysis) rarely account for within-species variation, fuzzy coding can be used to record biolog- ical traits, which allows for variation within a taxon for a speciﬁc trait (chevenet et al. 1994). however, when examining life history traits such as those included in this study, previous studies suggest that between- species variation generally exceeds within-species variation (blank & lamouroux 2007). another limi- tation is that hard-assigning species to life history strategies requires that species with intermediate strategies be forced into one strategy (see previous discussion). for example, in our geographic analysis, the composition of paciﬁc coastal rivers was shown to be predominantly equilibrium, in large part because of the prevalence of salmonids that are classiﬁed as equilibrium strategists using a hard-assignment rule. however, in reality most salmonids exhibit a life history intermediate between equilibrium (large egg size and high parental care) and periodic (large body size and late maturation). the use of trait-based approaches to address ecological problems is increasing (petchey & gaston 2006; webb et al., in press), and thus it is imperative that large databases such as the life history trait data base described here are explored for utility as well as limitations. this study described life history trait variation of freshwater ﬁshes of canada and the united states and found three major patterns. first, multivariate trait analysis supported the life history continuum model of winemiller & rose (1992) by identifying the three end-point strategies of equilib- rium, opportunistic and periodic. second, families of ﬁshes differed both in their composition of strategies and in the degree of within-family variation. third, watershed-scale patterns of life history variation were discernable and were congruent with biogeographic life history processes shaping the occurrence of strategies of throughout north america. in combination with similar trait investiga- tions for other freshwater taxa, including macrophytes (bornette et al. 1994), aquatic insects (poff et al. 2006; verberk et al. 2008; statzner & beˆche 2010), crayﬁsh (larson & olden, in press) and amphibians (sodhi et al. 2008), we believe that freshwater ecologists are well posed to advance trait-based approaches in their studies. freshwater ﬁshes acknowledgements we thank two anonymous referees for their comments that improved the ﬁnal manuscript, and nick mandrak for graciously providing ﬁsh distribution data for canada. we also thank david lawrence for his help with obtaining and organising ﬁsh distribution data for the united states. funding support was provided by a cobb fisheries scholarship and university of washington top scholar scholarship (mcm) and the usgs lower colorado river basin aquatic gap program (jdo). mcm and jdo conceived and developed the idea for the manuscript. jdo and zrs assembled the trait database, mcm conducted the data analysis, and all authors wrote the manuscript. references anderson, m.j. 2006. distance-based tests for homogeneity of multivariate dispersions. biometrics 62: 245–253. angermeier, p.l. 1995. ecological attributes of extinction- fresh-water ﬁshes of virginia. prone species – loss of conservation biology 9: 143–158. balon, e.k. 1975. reproductive guilds of ﬁshes – proposal and deﬁnition. journal of the fisheries research board of canada 32: 821–864. berra, t.m. 2007. freshwater ﬁsh distribution. chicago: the university of chicago press. blank, a. & lamouroux, n. 2007. large-scale intraspeciﬁc variation in life-history traits of european freshwater ﬁsh. journal of biogeography 34: 862–875. bornette, g., christophe, h., barrat, m. & amoros, c. 1994. theoretical habitat templets, species traits, and species richness: aquatic macrophytes in the upper rhoˆne river and its ﬂoodplain. freshwater biology 31: 487–505. breder, c.m. & rosen, d.e. 1966. modes of reproduction in ﬁshes. new york: natural history press. chevenet, f., dole´dec, s. & chessel, d. 1994. a fuzzy coding long-term ecological data. approach for freshwater biology 31: 295–309. the analysis of darlington, p.j. 1948. the geographical distribution of cold- blooded vertebrates. the quarterly review of biology 23: 1– 26. daufresne, m., roger, m.c., capra, h. & lamouroux, n. 2003. long-term changes within the invertebrate and ﬁsh commu- nities of the upper rhone river: effects of climatic factors. global change biology 10: 124–140. ero¨s, t. 2005. life-history diversiﬁcation in the middle danubian ﬁsh fauna – a conservation perspective. large rivers 16: 289–304. frimpong, e.a. & angermeier, p.l. 2009. fishtraits: a database of ecological and life-history traits of freshwater ﬁshes of the united states. fisheries 34: 487–495. garcı´a-berthou, e. 2007. the characteristics of invasive ﬁshes: what has been learned so far? journal of fish biology 71: 33– 55. goldstein, r.m. & meador, m.r. 2005. multilevel assessment of ﬁsh species traits to evaluate habitat degradation in streams of the upper midwest. north american journal of fisheries management 25: 180–194. gower, j.c. 1971. general coefﬁcient of similarity and some of its properties. biometrics 27: 857–874. life histories of north american freshwater ﬁshes hugueny, h., oberdorff, t. & tedesco, p.a. in press. commu- nity ecology of river ﬁshes: a large scale perspective. in: gido, k.b. & jackson, d.a., eds. community ecology of stream ﬁshes: concepts, approaches, and techniques. beth- esda, md: american fisheries society. iban˜ez, c., belliard, j., hughes, r.m., irz, p., kamdem-toham, a., lamouroux, n., tedesco, p.a. & oberdorff, t. 2009. convergence of temperate and tropical stream ﬁsh assem- blages. ecography 32: 658–670. irz, p., michonneau, f., oberdorff, t., whittier, t.r., lamou- roux, n., mouillot, d. & argillier, c. 2007. fish community comparisons along environmental gradients in lakes of france and north-east usa. global ecology and biogeog- raphy 16: 350–366. jackson, d.a. & harvey, h.h. 1989. biogeographic associa- tions in ﬁsh assemblages: local versus regional processes. ecology 70: 1472–1484. jackson, d.a., peres-neto, p.r. & olden, j.d. 2001. what controls who is where in freshwater ﬁsh communities—the roles of biotic, abiotic, and spatial factors. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 59: 157–170. king, j.r. & mcfarlane, g.a. 2003. marine ﬁsh life history strategies: applications to ﬁshery management. fisheries management and ecology 10: 249–264. lamouroux, n., poff, n.l. & angermeier, p.l. 2002. intercon- tinental convergence of stream ﬁsh community traits along geomorphic and hydraulic gradients. ecology 83: 1792– 1807. larson, e.r. & olden, j.d. 2010. latent extinction and invasion risk of crayﬁshes in the southeastern united states. conservation biology, doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2010. 01462.x legendre, p. & legendre, l. 1998. numerical ecology, 2nd edn. amsterdam: elsevier scientiﬁc. le´veˆque, c., oberdorff, t., paugy, d., stiassny, m.l.j. & tedesco, p.a. 2008. global diversity of ﬁsh (pisces) in freshwater. hydrobiologia 595: 545–567. magnuson, j.j., tonn, w.m., banerjee, a., toivonen, j., sanchez, o. & rask, m. 1998. isolation versus extinction in the assembly of ﬁshes in small northern lakes. ecology 79: 2941–2956. mahon, r. 1984. divergent structure in ﬁsh taxocenes of north temperate streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 41: 330–350. mandrak, n.e. 1995. biogeographic patterns of ﬁsh species richness in ontario lakes in relation to historical and environmental factors. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 52: 1462–1474. mcardle, b.h. & anderson, m.j. 2001. fitting multivariate models to community data: a comment on distance-based redundancy analysis. ecology 82: 290–297. mccann, k. 1998. density-dependent coexistence in ﬁsh communities. ecology 79: 2957–2967. mcgill, b.j., enquist, b.j., weiher, e. & westoby, m. 2006. rebuilding community ecology from functional traits. trends in ecology and evolution 21: 178–185. moyle, p.b. & herbold, b. 1987. life-history patterns and community structure in stream ﬁshes of western north america: comparisons with eastern north american and europe. in: matthews, w. j. & heins, d. c., editors. community and evolutionary ecology of north american 399 mims et al. stream fishes. norman, ok: university of oklahoma press, pp. 25–32. natureserve. 2004. downloadable animal datasets. nature- serve central databases. available: http://www.nature- serve.org/getdata/datasets/watershedhucs/index.jsp (august 2008). nelson, j.s., crossman, e.j., espinosa-pe´rez, h., findley, l.t., gilbert, c.r., lea, r.n. & williams, j.d. 2004. common and scientiﬁc names of ﬁshes from the u.s., canada, and mexico, 6th edn. bethesda, maryland: american fisheries society. olden, j.d. & kennard, m.j. in press. intercontinental com- parison of ﬁsh life history strategies along a gradient of hydrologic variability. in: gido, k.b. & jackson, d.a., eds. community ecology of stream ﬁshes: concepts, approaches, and techniques. bethesda, md: american fisheries society. olden, j.d., poff, n.l. & bestgen, k.r. 2006. life-history strategies predict ﬁsh invasions and extirpations in the colorado river basin. ecological monographs 76: 25–40. olden, j.d., poff, n.l. & bestgen, k.r. 2008. trait synergisms and the rarity, extirpation, and extinction risk of desert ﬁshes. ecology 89: 847–856. olden, j.d., kennard, m.k., leprieur, f., tedesco, p.a., winemiller, k.o & garcı´a-berthou, e. 2010. conservation biogeography of freshwater ﬁshes: past progress and future directions. diversity and distributions, in press. petchey, o.l. & gaston, k.j. 2004. functional diversity: back to basics and looking forward. ecology letters 9: 741–758. pianka, e.r. 1970. on r- and k-selection. american naturalist 102: 592–597. poff, n.l. & allan, j.d. 1995. functional organization of stream assemblages in relation to hydrologic variability. ecology 76: 606–627. poff, n.l., olden, j.d., vieira, n.k.m., finn, d.s., simmons, m.p. & kondratieff, b.c. 2006. functional trait niches of north american lotic insects: traits-based ecological appli- cations in light of phylogenetic relationships. journal of the north american benthological society 25: 730–755. smith, g.r. 1981. late cenozoic freshwater ﬁshes of north america. annual review of ecology and systematics 12: 163–193. sodhi, n.s., bickford, d., diesmos, a.c., lee, t.m., koh, l.p., brook, b.w., sekercioglu, c.h. & bradshaw, c.j.a. 2008. measuring the meltdown: drivers of global amphibian extinction and decline. plos one 3: e1636. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0001636. templet for ecological southwood, t.r.e. 1977. habitat, strategies – presidential address to british ecological society, 5 january 1977. journal of animal ecology 46: 337–365. southwood, t.r.e. 1988. tactics, strategies and templets. oikos 52: 3–18. statzner, b. & beˆche, l.a. 2010. can biological invertebrate traits resolve effects of multiple stressors on running water ecosystems? freshwater biology 55: 80–119. stearns, s.c. 1992. the evolution of life histories. oxford university press, oxford. tedesco, p. & hugueny, b. 2006. life history strategies affect climate based spatial synchrony in population dynamics of west african freshwater ﬁshes. oikos 115: 117–127. tedesco, p.a., hugueny, b., oberdorff, t., durr, h.h., merigoux, s. & merona, b.d. 2008. river hydrological seasonality inﬂuences life history strategies of tropical riverine ﬁshes. oceologia 156: 691–702. verberk, w.c.e.p., siepel, h. & esselink, h. 2008. life-history strategies in freshwater macroinvertebrates. freshwater biol- ogy 53: 1722–1738. vila-gispert, a. & moreno-amich, r. 2002. life-history patterns of 25 species from european freshwater ﬁsh communities. environmental biology of fishes 65: 387–400. vila-gispert, a., moreno-amich, r. & garcia-berthou, e. 2002. gradients of life-history variation: an intercontinental comparison of ﬁshes. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 12: 417–427. webb, c.t., hoeting, j., ames, g., pyne, m. & poff, n.l. 2010. a structured and dynamic framework to advance traits-based theory and prediction in ecology. ecology letters 13: 267– 283. welcomme, r.l., winemiller, k.o. & cowx, i.g. 2006. fish environmental guilds as a tool for assessment of ecological condition of rivers. river research and applications 22: 377–396. winemiller, k.o. 1989. patterns of variation in life history among south-american ﬁshes in seasonal environments. oecologia 81: 225–241. winemiller, k.o. 1992. ecomorphology of fresh-water ﬁshes. research & exploration 8: 308–327. winemiller, k.o. 2005. life history strategies, population regulation, and implications for ﬁsheries management. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 52: 872–885. winemiller, k.o. & rose, k.a. 1992. patterns of life history diversiﬁcation in north american ﬁshes: implications for population regulation. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 49: 2196–2218. wootton, r.j. 1984. introduction: tactics and strategies in ﬁsh reproduction. in: potts, g.w. & wootton, r. j., eds. fish reproduction: strategies and tactics. london: academic press, pp. 1–12. 400  