ecology of freshwater fish 2006: 15: 597–605 printed in singapore æ all rights reserved letter ó 2006 the authors journal compilation ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish standardising multi-laboratory microsatellite data in paciﬁc salmon: an historical view of the future moran p, teel dj, lahood es, drake j, kalinowski s. standardising multi-laboratory microsatellite data in paciﬁc salmon: an historical view of the future. ecology of freshwater fish: 15: 597–605. ó 2006 the authors. journal compilation ó 2006 blackwell munksgaard p. moran, d. j. teel, e. s. lahood, j. drake, s. kalinowski conservation biology division, north west fisheries science center, seattle, wa, usa abstract – for at least 15 years, multiple paciﬁc rim laboratories have cooperated to standardise the collection of paciﬁc salmon genetic data. for species such as chinook salmon and chum salmon, allozyme electrophoretic data sets now include hundreds of populations sampled over multiple years throughout the north paciﬁc. more recently, microsatellite dna markers have emerged as a new cornerstone of paciﬁc salmon genetic research. the allozyme experience provides at least two important lessons regarding shared, standardised databases. first, interlaboratory standardisation is sufﬁciently costly and time consuming that little progress is typically made in the absence of speciﬁc ﬁshery management and conservation needs; thus immediate needs will direct future standardisation. secondly, justiﬁed or not, there are signiﬁcant concerns regarding intellectual propriety and other perceived privileges associated with unpublished genetic data that are shared among laboratories. this article describes challenges to genetic standardisation relative to new research goals, along with speciﬁc suggestions for meeting those challenges. key words: oncorhynchus; paciﬁc salmon; microsatellite; population genetics paul moran, conservation biology division, north west fisheries science center, 2725 montlake boulevard east, seattle, wa 98112 2097, usa; e-mail: paul.moran@noaa.gov accepted for publication june 9, 2006 introduction the use of microsatellite markers in paciﬁc salmon (oncorhynchus spp.) has increased dramatically in recent years as it has throughout ecological genetics and throughout the world. microsatellites are now used widely in paciﬁc salmon for descriptive popula- tion genetics (nelson et al. 1998; olsen et al. 1998; wenburg et al. 1998; banks et al. 2000; ford et al. 2004), historical biogeography (nielsen & fountain 1999), ﬁshery management (scribner et al. 1998; beacham & wood 1999; small et al. 2004), repro- ductive biology (bentzen et al. 2001; ramstad et al. 2003), genomics and mapping (jackson et al. 1998; danzmann et al. 1999; sakamoto et al. 1999) and conservation biology (banks et al. 1996; nielsen et al. 1999; banks et al. 2000; olsen et al. 2000; nelson et al. 2003). small local studies conducted by single research groups have grown to include tens of thousands of ﬁsh from scores of populations across multiple river basins. microsatellite markers have come to play similarly important roles elsewhere in the world, and although we focus here on paciﬁc salmon in north america, we know that standardisa- tion is an issue in many species, particularly in a conservation context. recent conservation genetic literature underscores the breadth of microsatellite use worldwide (moran 2002). at the same time, there is increasing frustration among managers and conservation biologists regard- ing the inability to merge regional data sets generated in different laboratories. in order to make compar- isons between data sets, whether microsatellite data or some other class of genetic data, there must be a set of loci or characters that is examined in common between laboratories. a second impediment to fusing data sets is that alleles or character states within a locus, nearly always have different designations in doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2006.00201.x 597 moran et al. different laboratories. microsatellite alleles are typic- ally identiﬁed by size in base pairs (in salmon genetics), and while this might seem to simplify coordination among laboratories, the absolute sizing of microsatellite alleles is complicated by cross- platform differences in electrophoretic conditions (see below). geneticists agree on the need to standardise data, yet little progress has been made. many of the issues now faced in the implementation of microsatellite markers at large geographic scales were ﬁrst confronted by salmon geneticists over 20 years ago in the coastwide standardisation of allozyme data (shaklee & phelps 1990; shaklee et al. 1990, 1999; utter 1991; utter & ryman 1993). these issues were typically resolved through formal collab- orations that included exchanges of information on electrophoretic conditions, buffer systems, models used to interpret complex tetraploid banding patterns and photographs of gels. the ultimate veriﬁcation of genotyping consistency came through the systematic exchange of tissues among laboratories. signiﬁcant effort was often required to resolve standardisation issues (shaklee & white 1991), and progress was slow throughout in cases where management directives provided speciﬁc and immediate motivation. the 1980s and 1990s, except in this article, we discuss practical issues related to current standardisation of microsatellite data for speciﬁc research objectives. we then summarise four critical aspects of future microsatellite standardisation: (i) geographic scale of standardisation, (ii) selection of loci, (iii) standardisation of allele designations and (iv) sharing of unpublished data. our comments are offered to a general audience interested in the issue of combining microsatellite data collected in different laboratories, including population geneticists, ecolo- gists, conservation biologists, ﬁsh and wildlife man- agers and wildlife forensic scientists. a challenge is to provide breadth yet address some of the fairly technical aspects of microsatellite variation. standardisation of microsatellite data: practical issues precise but inaccurate sizing of microsatellite alleles one important practical issue confronting microsat- ellite standardisation relates to electrophoretic mobil- ity and the size estimation of alleles. the ﬂuorescent electrophoretic instruments in current widespread use in salmon genetics employ internal lane standards and are extremely precise (generally <0.3 bp be- tween assays of the same allele). however, size estimates between platforms commonly differ by 3– 6 bp or more (fig. 1; lahood et al. 2002) because of slight differences in the electrophoretic properties of as opposed to capillary slab gel systems 598 electrophoretic instruments, for example. even when laboratories use the same molecular weight size standards, the same sizing algorithm and the same ﬂuorescent labels, standardised sizing can be com- plicated by the fact that microsatellite alleles and fragments in the standard have different sequences and base composition resulting in differential mobil- ity under different electrophoretic conditions (gill et al. 1994; haberl & tautz 1999). therefore, size estimates – and hence allele designations – are really only relative to other estimates on the same instrument. moreover, even the relative allele desig- nations derived from a single instrument can break down because of the mobility characteristics of particular sequences (see below). anomalous mobilities most salmon microsatellite loci exhibit alleles that differ from one another by multiples of 2 or 4 bp (dinucleotide and tetranucleotide repeats, respect- ively); however, some pairs of alleles can show small but consistent mobility differences (<0.5 bp) from the general repeat motif, apparently violating the 2 or 4-bp repeat increment. these slight mobility differences presumably relate to base substitutions in the regions ﬂanking the tandem repeat or imperfect repeats within the array. that is, two alleles with the same number of repeat units can differ slightly in mobility because of sequence differences. although these mobility differ- ences are consistent, they complicate automated genotyping, and the alleles must often be pooled. the choices for pooling of alleles (often referred to as ‘binning’ with microsatellite alleles) must be clearly described in the metadata associated with future microsatellite data sets, if they are to be readily integrated with data collected in other laboratories. another implication of base composition and mobil- ity is that it is often impossible to give allele designa- tions that consistently reﬂect even the relative sizes of the microsatellite alleles. for example, if base compo- sition of the microsatellite alleles produces an increased mobility relative to the same sized fragment in the standard, then the apparent size increment between alleles will be larger than the actual repeat unit, say 2.1 bp rather than the actual 2.0 bp. if the smallest allele is designated by size (e.g., 110.0 bp ¼ ‘110’, 112.1 bp ¼ ‘112’, etc.), then the 20th allele will receive a designation that is a full 2 bp smaller than its estimated size (e.g., 152.0 bp ¼ ‘150’). these numbers are given for simplicity. an actual example is shown in fig. 1. for a locus with a broad bimodal distribution, these patterns can be subtle, and the likelihood of allele designation errors between plat- forms is high (haberl & tautz 1999; weeks et al. 2002). interlaboratory microsatellite standardisation 70 75 80 85 abi genotyper® 2.0 95 100 90 4.14 bp s t i n u t n e c s e r o u l f e v i t l a e r 2000 1500 1000 500 1500 1000 500 75.00 75.00 l k 89.07 93.21 100.00 4.25 bp l k 85.32 89.57 fragment size (bp) 100.00 fig. 1. for the same chinook salmon individual with microsatellite genotype ‘lk’ (ots2 labelled with fam), electropherograms show substantial differences in the estimated allele sizes produced by two electrophoretic instruments (applied biosystems incorporated (foster city, california, usa) 377 genetic analyzer below and abi 310 above). in addition, a greater than 2.0-bp estimated repeat unit increment is shown between alleles for this dinucleotide locus (2.07 and 2.13-bp increment on each instrument, respectively). together these two common attributes of microsatellites complicate cross-platform standardisation as well as consistent naming of alleles according to size within a given platform (haberl & tautz 1999). 75 and 100-bp peaks (grey) represent fragments in the same molecular weight size standard. estimated sizes of each fragment in the test genotype (black) are shown beneath the arbitrarily designated allele names, ‘l’ and ‘k’ (lahood et al. 2002). high levels of variability although some microsatellite loci have only two alleles and may be ﬁxed in many populations, most microsatellites in current use are highly polymorphic (dewoody & avise 2000). some microsatellite loci have 30 or more alleles in a single population sample of 48 ﬁsh. even with more commonly used micro- satellite loci with 8–12 alleles, high allelic diversity naturally has important implications for genetic stand- ardisation, both in the way microsatellites are assayed and in the way the resulting data are analysed. microsatellites are often sufﬁciently variable that it can be risky to make inferences about allele identity among regional data. in addition to broad and complex size distributions, some microsatellite loci have com- plicated imperfect repeat structures. as observed by researchers seeking to standardise allele designations among human genomics laboratories, ‘it would not sufﬁce to attempt to align alleles by typing [or sequencing] only one or two controls in common’ (weeks et al. 2002). current motivation for standardised genotyping future genetic standardisation in in planning for paciﬁc salmon, is important to consider current activities and short-term goals in the context of it broader, long-term objectives. without clearly deﬁned goals that are driven by speciﬁc biological and management objectives, standardisation efforts will be inefﬁcient, and it will be difﬁcult to get broad consensus in the research community for standardisa- tion activities. although the focus here is paciﬁc salmon, genetic standardisation is an important issue in many other species often motivated by similar objectives. laboratory expands, standardisation of genetic markers typically follows a bottom-up approach. that is, allele standardisation happens ﬁrst within a single laboratory, perhaps between individual researchers, between tissue types or between platforms/methods within a given study. eventually, as the geographic scope of the study within a standardisation is required within and between regions and may begin to involve other laboratories. finally, regional stand- ardisation efforts are combined to produce coastwide baseline data and inevitably include multiple laborat- ories. viewing the scope of standardisation as local, regional and species-wide (or at least ‘coastwide’), current for microsatellite data collection are primarily directed at a regional scale, e.g., current efforts to standardise genetic data among laboratories working on columbia river steelhead. already, however, broader, more ambitious efforts are underway (see http://www.ﬁsheries.org/ standardisation efforts 599 moran et al. genetics/newsletters/apr2004.shtml#content2 for range- wide microsatellite in chinook salmon). thus, it is worth considering various current goals of genetic standardisation. standardisation conservation and management units is not unusual conservation and recovery goals have come to dominate paciﬁc salmon genetics. many current conservation problems require genetic data to make informed management decisions (national research council 1996; mcelhany et al. 2000; moran 2002). in most cases, speciﬁc genetic data are not available to assist in these decisions. as a result, it is often the case that geneticists and managers must assem- ble whatever bits of incompatible genetic data are available. it to be confronted with only semi-overlapping sets of loci and incompatible allele designations. there is increased interest in comprehensive genetic data of the kind needed for identiﬁcation units (esus; waples 1991) and smaller management or conservation units within esus. the hope among managers individual genetics laboratories will eventually converge on suites of loci and allele designations that will allow the collected in different laboratories and for different classes of studies. combination of data community of is that the of evolutionarily signiﬁcant mixture analysis: from harvest to habitat use the initial motivation for standardising allozyme data for paciﬁc salmon was to analyse mixed-stock ﬁsher- ies (e.g., shaklee & phelps 1990). because harvest of adult ﬁsh often targets stocks originating from numerous regions, mixture analyses using genetic data (pella & milner 1987) typically require geogra- phically broad baseline data sets. following more than two decades of allozyme applications (grant et al. 1980; shaklee et al. 1999; winans et al. 2001), microsatellites have recently been widely employed to analyse adult ﬁsh harvests (beacham & wood 1999; beacham et al. 2001; winans et al. 2004). the shift from allozymes to dna analysis is occurring for four reasons. first, allozymes are widely considered to require lethal sampling (but see van doornik et al. 1999), whereas nonlethal sampling is preferred when conducting baseline surveys of depressed populations. secondly, tissues taken for dna analysis can be stored and shipped at ambient temperature, eliminating the need for dry ice or liquid nitrogen on shipboard. thirdly, the large number of highly polymorphic microsatellite markers currently available provides substantially greater power for most analyses. and fourthly, microsatellites now offer lower data collec- tion costs and higher throughput. 600 applications of genetic data to stock mixtures extend beyond the management of adult ﬁsheries. for example, recent studies have examined the stock composition of juvenile coho salmon in nearshore coastal areas (teel et al. 2003) and migration patterns of chum salmon in the north paciﬁc (seeb et al. 2004). such studies will certainly become more prevalent as salmon recovery research focuses on how juvenile salmon uses estuarine and nearshore habitats, both temporally and spatially (brodeur et al. 2000). in addition, highly variable microsatellite markers cou- pled with an expansion of analytical approaches (e.g., hansen et al. 2001) offer great potential for estimating the stock origins of individual ﬁsh, even in complex mixtures. the identiﬁcation of individuals will cer- tainly become an important asset in the analyses of ﬁsh condition, growth and survival in estuarine and marine environments. forensic databases in recent years, salmon ﬁsheries enforcement has expanded from harvest on the high seas to protection of endangered species in freshwater habitats far from the ocean (withler et al. 2004). federal, state and tribal management agencies all have enforcement responsi- bilities that include identiﬁcation of the origin of individual ﬁsh and groups of ﬁsh. these agencies must prosecute u.s. endangered species act violations as well as state and tribal conservation-related crimes. there is an increasing interest in the forensic com- munity in developing basin-wide databases that would help determine (at least probabilistically) the popula- tion-of-origin or esu-of-origin of a given ﬁsh or ﬁsh tissue. the changing role of forensics and ﬁsheries enforcement has created a convergence of manage- ment interests. for example, forensic efforts to char- acterise genetic diversity on a basin-wide level and identify esu-speciﬁc markers will inevitably require some of the same standardisation measures that will be needed for combining population genetic data sets for other management purposes. marine mammal feeding ecology marine mammal trophic ecology is another manage- ment issue that has implications for basin-wide characterisation and genetic standardisation in salmon. managers face a signiﬁcant dilemma when federally protected marine mammal species prey on salmon populations that are listed under the u.s. endangered species act [national marine fisheries service (nmfs) 1997]. in an effort to quantify predation and determine which salmon species and stocks are involved, our group has undertaken collaboration with the national marine mammal laboratory (nmfs) to develop species-speciﬁc and esu-speciﬁc markers within species. these markers have been used to analyse bones recovered from paciﬁc harbour seal (phoca vitulina richardsi) scat (purcell et al. 2004) and to estimate stock-of-origin for chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha) (j. rhydderch unpub- lished data). these are examples of fundamental changes in the salmon genetics landscape in recent years. there has been an explosion of newly available microsatellite markers; the involvement of more laboratories and emerging issues in salmon recovery, harvest manage- ment, hatchery/wild interactions, marine mammal trophic ecology and forensics. these are the likely priorities that will shape the future of standardisation in ecological genetics. future of microsatellite standardisation in paciﬁc salmon with the rapid growth of microsatellite analysis in paciﬁc salmon, there is already a need to begin standardisation and coordination of genetic data collection; however progress has been slow for lack of funding. as motivation for standardisation increa- ses, it is important to anticipate speciﬁc research and management needs and to map out a collaborative interlaboratory effort to address those needs. this process was initiated in june 1999, and meetings in 2000 and 2001 pursued the goals set out in 1999. there was, however, little real action until the paciﬁc salmon commission came forth with signiﬁcant funding in 2004. in the following sections, we summarise the considerations that emerged from data standardisation efforts up to that time. these issues are not necessarily speciﬁc to paciﬁc salmon nor to microsatellite data and should be expected to arise in a wide range of collaborative conservation research. four speciﬁc challenges to standardisation and suggested directions geographic scale of standardisation in most cases, proximate efforts will be directed towards regional standardisation. eventually, region- ally standardised databases will expand or merge to become coastwide. therefore, a certain amount of ﬂexibility must be built in to regional standardisation activities. the broader the standardisation in terms of geography and concomitant genetic diversity, the more challenging the effort will become. inevitably, greater genetic diversity is manifest as broader allele size ranges, perhaps overlapping other loci in multiplex electrophoresis and complicating genotyping of mul- tiple loci (microsatellite loci are typically analysed as ‘multiplex sets’, groups of loci with non-overlapping interlaboratory microsatellite standardisation size ranges assayed simultaneously, see olsen et al. 1996; neff et al. 2000). as more distantly related populations are included in the standardisation, there is also an increased likelihood of encountering complex multimodal allele frequency distributions, null alleles, duplicated loci and other phenomena that may com- promise the utility of selected loci. expectations for range-wide, species-wide standardisation must be tempered by the levels of genetic variability likely to be encountered. given the levels of mutation exhibited by many microsatellite loci, it may not be possible to standardise allele designations throughout species as diverse as, for example, oncorhynchus_mykiss, a large complex of many inland and coastal subspecies and life history forms including anadromous steelhead, resident rainbow trout and ancient redband (behnke 1992). the recommendation is to consider the costs and beneﬁts of standardising at various geographic scales. for example, driven by range-wide harvest management, the decision was made in chinook salmon to standardise microsatellite markers coast- wide. in contrast, management issues in steelhead and rainbow trout were more local and the cost and complexity of range-wide standardisation did not appear justiﬁed. although current standardisation in o. mykiss includes three paciﬁc northwest subspecies, the focus is on the columbia river basin. broader geographic standardisation is always desirable, but may not always justify the cost. inevitably be more difﬁcult selection of loci the selection of loci for standardisation is driven largely by historical inertia, i.e., laboratories favour loci used in the past and for which large data sets have accumulated. however, the initiation of a multi- laboratory standardisation requires re-evaluation of loci with focus on future needs. highly polymorphic loci or loci with broad multimodal distributions are best avoided. loci showing intermediate polymorph- ism should generally be favoured as a result of more reliable genotyping. given that the more polymorphic loci will almost to standardise, especially at broad geographic scales, they should probably be reserved primarily for ﬁne- scale pedigree and genetic mapping studies where they are most valuable, at least on a per-locus basis. it is worth recognising, however, that any loss of resolution because of fewer alleles per locus can be made up through the use of more loci (kalinowski 2002, 2004). the most irrespective of overall diversity, may be those that show imperfect repeat structures and other electrophoretic anomalies (see above). a ﬁnal beneﬁt to selecting a larger number of less polymorphic loci is that they tend to be smaller in size and therefore amplify more reliably from degraded dna samples (e.g., from ﬁsh bones in important loci to avoid, 601 moran et al. marine mammal scat; purcell et al. 2004) or ﬁsh scales (moran & baker 2002). most electrophoretic genotyp- ing systems can resolve microsatellite alleles up to 500 bp or more; however, practical experience shows that loci less than 350 bp amplify more successfully from compromised dna samples, as often must be used in ecological genetics, whether for salmon or other species, especially those of conservation con- cern. even good quality dna can exhibit ‘upper allele drop out’, in which the ampliﬁcation of the larger allele in a heterozygous individual is diminished to the point that it is not identiﬁed, effectively creating a null allele. upper allele drop out is directly related to increasing size range of alleles. too can be analysed as a multiplex set because, like the loci themselves, they are non-overlapping, either in size or ﬂuorescent label). the allele ladder method as presented by lahood et al. (2002) is also amenable to the addition of newly identiﬁed alleles, thus providing needed ﬂexibility when the geographic scope of standardisation increa- ses, and new interlaboratory collaborations are initi- ated (lahood unpublished data). we encourage routine sequencing of representative alleles in studies using microsatellite loci; however, we believe that, along with tissue and dna sample exchange, the allele ladders will be the most immediate and most useful tool in multi-laboratory collaborations. they often exhibit many investigators favour tetranucleotide repeats; however, we ﬁnd that less uniform mobility (e.g., variation in repeat unit increment) making bimodal distributions and imper- fect repeats more challenging to standardise among laboratories. plenty of dinucleotide markers are available for all salmonids and many other species that show very little stutter, an oft-cited liability of dinucleotide repeats. we therefore prefer dinucleo- tide repeats with compact distributions containing lots of alleles in a relatively small size range. this strategy tends to produce markers that amplify from degraded tissue, yet provide maximum information content while occupying little of the practical size range on the (100– 350 bp). if loci have narrow size ranges, it is not uncommon to simultaneously analyse two or three loci with each dye label in a multiplexed electroph- oretic reaction. however, loci with a larger size range of alleles require that each dye label be dedicated to a single locus. this discussion assumes, of course, that single-base resolution is obtainable. clearly, these considerations in favour of tetranucleotide repeats. limited resolution would pre-empt electrophoretic instrument standardisation of allele designations based on the human forensic and diagnostic model, lahood et al. (2002) proposed allele ladders as a method for interagency allele standardisation in salmon. a microsatellite allele ladder is a cocktail of pcr products pooled from multiple individuals and represents all or many of the alleles likely to be encountered in a given species for a particular locus. the diluted cocktail is distributed to other laboratories as a single control and cross-validation sample. allele ladders provide the same veriﬁcation of genotyping consistency that was achieved through distribution of reference tissues for standardising allozyme analysis, except that the ladders are more efﬁcient because all alleles at a locus are pcr-ampliﬁed together and assayed in a single gel lane or a single injection through an electrophoretic capillary (i.e., the ladders 602 logistics of sharing unpublished data the social landscape of salmon population genetic research in north america has also changed funda- mentally, as genetic data have come to play a major role in natural resource policy decisions. issues of intellectual propriety have become tempered by soci- ety’s need to protect biodiversity. resource manage- ment decisions often require expeditious distribution of unpublished population genetic data to state, tribal and federal analysis. researchers in ecological and population genetics should expect requests for unpublished data. speciﬁc requirements related to both distribution of results and data standardisation are already appearing in contracts with u.s. fish and wildlife service and bonneville power administration. independent agencies for sharing of unpublished data may involve various legal directives. for example, there are four sources of guidance concerning potential requirements to release genetic data under u.s. federal laws: • freedom of information reform act of 1986 (foia) • guidelines from the department of justice and the ofﬁce of management and budget • court rulings that required changes to earlier policies • executive orders (e.g., executive order no. 12600, which requires notiﬁcation to submitters of conﬁdential business data prior to release). the outcome of a particular request would depend on (i) the speciﬁc type of data requested (tissue samples, allele frequency data, preliminary analyses, draft reports); (ii) the type of organisation (state, federal, university, tribal, individual) from which the original data were obtained and (iii) whether federal funding supported the data collection. the foia is the most likely avenue for a request, although state laws might also be relevant. the foia provides that any person has the right to request access to federal agency records or informa- tion. upon receiving a written request, federal agen- and law enforcement cies are required to disclose records, except for those that are exempted by any of the nine provisions in the statute. three of the exemptions (trade secret/conﬁ- dential information, pre-decisional deliberative mater- ial could potentially apply to requests for release of genetic data. although it is possible that a foia exemption could be invoked to prevent the release of genetic data, there have been no court cases, to date, interpreting the foia as applied to genetic data. remains an uncertain issue that is relevant to shared standardised data sets and conditional use agreements. investigations) it conclusions there will be increasing need in the future to collect genetic data in a way that is conducive to integration of individual studies – indeed, management is insisting on it. current efforts can beneﬁt both technically, logis- tically and conceptually from an historical perspective that draws on experience with allozymes. genetic technology is evolving so rapidly that it is difﬁcult to predict the long-term importance of microsatellite analysis. it seems likely, however, that for at least the next 10 years or so, microsatellites will play a pivotal role in ecological genetics. although numerous difﬁ- culties remain in the standardisation of microsatellites for paciﬁc salmon and other species, the pay-off is substantial in terms of the added utility of combined data to address a broad array of new problems not originally identiﬁed in the individual studies. acknowledgements we thank w.s. grant for his interest and encouragement in coastwide standardisation activities. we also thank the paciﬁc rim salmon genetics community as a whole, especially j.l. nielsen (united states geological survey), j.b. olsen (alaska department of fish and game) and j.b. shaklee (washington department of fish and wildlife) for active participation in preliminary standardisation efforts. m.j. ford, r.s. waples and g.a. winans provided valuable editorial comments on early drafts. this work was supported in part by bonneville power administration project 198909600. references banks, m.a., baldwin, b. & hedgecock, d. 1996. research on chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha) stock structure using microsatellite dna. bulletin of national research institute of aquaculture supplement 2: 5–9. banks, m.a., rashbrook, v.k., calavetta, m.j., dean, c.a. & hedgecock, d. 2000. analysis of microsatellite dna resolves genetic structure and diversity of chinook salmon (oncorhynchus_tshawytscha) in california’s central valley. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 57: 915– 927. interlaboratory microsatellite standardisation beacham, t.d. & wood, c.c. 1999. application of micro- satellite dna variation to estimation of stock composition and escapement of nass river sockeye salmon (oncor- hynchus nerka). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 56: 297–310. beacham, t.d., candy, j.r., supernault, k.j. et al. 2001. evaluation and application of microsatellite and major histocompatibility complex variation for stock identiﬁcation of coho salmon in british columbia. transactions of the american fisheries society 130: 1116–1155. behnke, r.j. 1992. native trout of western north america. american fisheries society monograph 6. bethesda, md, american fisheries society. bentzen, p., olsen, j.b., mclean, j.e., seamons, t.r. & quinn, t.p. 2001. kinship analysis of paciﬁc salmon: insights into mating, homing, and timing of reproduction. the journal of heredity 92: 127–136. brodeur, r.d., boehlert, g.w., casillas, e. et al. 2000. a coordinated research plan for estuarine and ocean research on paciﬁc salmon. fisheries 25: 7–16. danzmann, r.g., jackson, t.r. & ferguson, m.m. 1999. epistasis in allelic expression at upper temperature tolerance qtl in rainbow trout. aquaculture 173: 45–58. dewoody, j.a. & avise, j.c. 2000. microsatellite variation in marine, freshwater and anadromous ﬁshes compared with other animals. journal of fish biology 56: 461–473. ford, m.j., teel, d., van doornik, d.m., kuligowski, d. & lawson, p.w. 2004. genetic population structure of central coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch). oregon coast conservation genetics 5: 797–812. gill, p., woodroffe, s., bar, w. et al. 1994. report of the european dna proﬁling group (ednap) – towards stand- ardisation of short loci. forensic science international 65: 51–59. tandem repeat (str) grant, w.s., milner, g.b., krasnowski, p. & utter, f.m. 1980. use of biochemical genetic variants for identiﬁcation of sockeye salmon (oncorhynchus_nerka) stocks in cook inlet, alaska. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 37: 1236–1247. haberl, m. & tautz, d. 1999. comparative allele sizing can produce inaccurate allele size differences for microsatellites. molecular ecology 8: 1347–1350. hansen, m.m., kenchington, e. & nielsen, e.e. 2001. assigning individual ﬁsh to populations using microsatellite dna mar- kers: methods and applications. fish and fisheries 2: 93–112. jackson, t.r., ferguson, m.m., danzmann, r.g. et al. 1998. identiﬁcation of two qtl inﬂuencing upper temperature tolerance in rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) half-sib families. heredity 80: 143–151. kalinowski, s.t. 2002. how many alleles per locus should be used to estimate genetic distance? heredity 89: 62–65. kalinowski, s.t. 2004. genetic polymorphism and mixed stock ﬁsheries analysis. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 1075–1082. lahood, e.s., moran, p., olsen, j., grant, w.s. & park, l.k. 2002. microsatellite allele ladders in two species of paciﬁc salmon: preparation and ﬁeld-test results. molecular ecololgy notes 2: 187–190. mcelhany, p., ruckelshaus, m.h., ford, m.j., wainwright, t.c. & bjorkstedt, e.p. 2000. viable salmonid populations and the 603 moran et al. recovery of evolutionarily signiﬁcant units. noaa technical memorandum nmfs-nwfsc-42. u.s. department of commerce, 156 pp. available at: http://www.nwfsc.noaa. gov/publications/techmemos/tm42/tm42.pdf. moran, p. 2002. current conservation genetics: building an ecological approach to the synthesis of molecular and quantitative genetic methods. ecology of freshwater fish 11: 30–55. moran, p. & baker, j. 2002. polymerase chain reaction inhibition in historical ﬁsh scale mounting cards. transac- tions of the american fisheries society 131: 109–119. national marine fisheries service (nmfs). 1997. investigation of scientiﬁc information on the impacts of california sea lions and paciﬁc harbor seals on salmonids and on the coastal ecosystems of washington, oregon, and california. noaa technical memorandum nmfs-nwfsc-28. u.s. depart- ment of commerce, 172 pp. http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/ publications/techmemos/tm28/tm28.pdf. national research council. 1996. committee on protection and management of paciﬁc northwest anadromous salmonids. upstream: salmon and society in the paciﬁc northwest. washington, dc: national academy press, 472 pp. neff, b.d., fu, p. & gross, m.r. 2000. microsatellite multiplexing in ﬁsh. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 584–593. nelson, r.j., beacham, t.d. & small, m.p. 1998. microsatellite analysis of the population structure of a vancouver island sockeye salmon (oncorhynchus_nerka) stock complex using nondenaturing gel electrophoresis. molecular marine biol- ogy and biotechnology 7: 312–319. nelson, r.j., wood, c.c., cooper, g., smith, c., koop, b. 2003. population structure of sockeye salmon of the central coast of british columbia: for recovery planning. north american journal of fisheries management 23: 703–720. implications nielsen, j.l. & fountain, m.c. 1999. microsatellite diversity in sympatric reproductive ecotypes of paciﬁc steelhead (oncor- hynchus mykiss) from the middle fork eel river, california. ecology of freshwater fish 8: 159–168. nielsen, j.l., crow, k.d. & fountain, m.c. 1999. micro- satellite diversity and conservation of a relic trout population: mccloud river redband trout. molecular ecology 8: s129– s142. olsen, j.b., wenburg, j.k. & bentzen, p. 1996. semiautomated multilocus genotyping of paciﬁc salmon (oncorhynchus spp.) using microsatellites. molecular marine biology and biotechnology 5: 259–272. olsen, j.b., seeb, l.w., bentzen, p. & seeb, j.e. 1998. genetic interpretation of broad-scale microsatellite polymorphism in odd-year pink salmon. transactions of the american fish- eries society 127: 535–550. olsen, j.b., bentzen, p., banks, m.a., shaklee, j.b. & young, reveal population identity of s. 2000. microsatellites individual pink salmon to allow supportive breeding of a population at risk of extinction. transactions of the american fisheries society 129: 232–242. pella, j. & milner, g.b. 1987. use of genetic marks in stock composition analyses. in: ryman, n. & utter, f., eds. population genetics and fishery management. seattle, wa: washington sea grant, university of washington press, pp. 247–276. 604 purcell, m., mackey, g., lahood, e., huber, h. & park, l. 2004. genetic identiﬁcation of salmonid bones from marine mammal scat. fishery bulletin 102: 213–220. ramstad, k.m. foote, c.j., olsen, j.b. & rogers, d. 2003. genetic and phenotypic evidence of reproductive isolation between seasonal runs of sockeye salmon in bear lake, alaska. transactions of the american fisheries society 132: 997–1013. sakamoto, t., danzmann, r.g., okamoto, n., ferguson, m.m. & ihssen, p.e. 1999. linkage analysis of quantitative trait loci associated with spawning time in rainbow trout (oncor- hynchus mykiss). aquaculture 173: 33–43. scribner, k.t., crane, p.a., spearman, w.j. & seeb, l.w. 1998. dna and allozyme markers provide concordant estimates of population differentiation: analysis of us and canadian populations of yukon river fall-run chum salmon (oncor- hynchus keta). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 1748–1758. seeb, l.w., crane, p.a., kondzela, c.m. et al. 2004. migration of paciﬁc rim chum salmon on the high seas: insights from genetic data. environmental biology of fishes 69: 21–36. shaklee, j.b. & phelps, s.r. 1990. operation of a large-scale multiagency stock identiﬁcation program. american fisheries society symposium 7: 817–830. shaklee, j.b. & white, b.a. 1991. need for replicated electrophoretic analysis in multiagency genetic stock identi- ﬁcation (gsi) programs: example from a pink salmon (oncorhynchus_gorbuscha) gsi ﬁsheries study. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 48: 1391–1407. shaklee, j.b., allendorf, f.w., morizot, d.c. & whitt, g.s. 1990. gene nomenclature for protein-coding loci in ﬁsh. transactions of the american fisheries society 119: 2–15. shaklee, j.b., beacham, t.d., seeb, l. & white, b.a. 1999. managing ﬁsheries using genetic data: case studies from four species of paciﬁc salmon. fisheries research 43: 45–78. small, m.p., pichahchy, a.e., von bargen, j.f. ,& young, s.f. 2004. have native coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) persisted in the nooksack and samish rivers despite continous hatchery production throughout the past century? conservation genetics 5: 367–379. teel, d.j., van doornik, d.m., kuligowski, d.r. & grant, w.s. 2003. genetic analysis of juvenile coho salmon (oncorhynchus_kisutch) off oregon and washington reveals few columbia river wild ﬁsh. fishery bulletin 101: 640– 652. utter, f. 1991. biochemical genetics and ﬁshery management: an historical perspective. journal of fish biology 39a: 1–20. utter, f.m. & ryman, n. 1993. genetic markers and mixed stock ﬁsheries. fisheries 18: 11–21. van doornik, d.m., winans, g.a., & teel, d.j. 1999. allozyme studies of paciﬁc salmonids with nonlethal sampling of ﬁn tissue. north american journal of fisheries management 19: 678–686. waples, r.s. 1991. paciﬁc salmon, oncorhynchus spp., and the deﬁnition of ‘‘species’’ under the endangered species act. marine fisheries review 53: 11–22. weeks, d.e., conley, y.p., ferrell, r.e., mah, t.s. & gorin, m.b. 2002. a tale of two genotypes: consistency between two high-throughput genotyping centers. genome research 12: 430–435. wenburg, j.k., olsen, j.b. & bentzen, p. 1998. multiplexed systems of microsatellites for genetic analysis in coastal cutthroat trout (oncorhynchus clarki clarki) and steelhead (oncorhynchus_mykiss). molecular marine biology and biotechnology 5: 273–283. winans, g.a., viele, d., grover, a., palmer-zwahlen, m., teel, d.j. & van doornik, d.m. 2001. an update of genetic stock identiﬁcation of chinook salmon in the paciﬁc northwest: test ﬁsheries in california. reviews in fisheries science 9: 213–237. interlaboratory microsatellite standardisation winans, g.a., paquin, m.z., vandoornik, d.m. et al. 2004. genetic stock identiﬁcation of steelhead in the columbia river basin: an evaluation of different molecular markers. north american journal of fisheries management 24: 672– 685. withler, r.e., candy, j.r., beacham, t.d. & miller, k.m. 2004. forensic dna analysis of paciﬁc salmonid samples for species and stock identiﬁcation. environmental biology of fishes 69: 275–285. 605  