ecology of freshwater fish 2009: 18: 92–105 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved no claim to original us government works journal compilation ó 2008 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish spatial patterning of habitat for oncorhynchus_mykiss in a system of intermittent and perennial streams boughton da, fish h, pope j, holt g. spatial patterning of habitat for oncorhynchus_mykiss in a system of intermittent and perennial streams. ecology of freshwater fish 2009: 18: 92–105. no claim to original us government works. journal compilation ó 2008 blackwell munksgaard abstract – the salmonid oncorhynchus_mykiss tends to inhabit forested or snow-fed streams having cold reliable ﬂows, but in the california chaparral they inhabit rain-fed stream networks with extensive areas of intermittent ﬂow. we hypothesised that hydrological mechanisms in such watersheds tend to spatially segregate spawning and over-summering habitats, and tested the hypothesis using observations from a series of tributaries in a pristine watershed. consistent with the hypothesis, reaches with suitably sized spawning gravels tended to occur in intermittent tributaries, and also the perennial mainstem (which was too warm for over- summering). in early summer, juvenile o. mykiss (<10 cm) occurred at similar densities in the intermittent and perennial tributaries, but larger ﬁsh had greater densities in perennial tributaries. large wood debris would be expected to mitigate the spatial segregation of habitats somewhat, but was scarce, though stream-side outcrops appeared to partially compensate by forcing gravel bars in high-gradient channels. d. a. boughton1, h. fish1, j. pope2, g. holt2 1sw fisheries science center, noaa fisheries, santa cruz, 2joint institute for marine observa- tions, university of california, santa cruz, ca usa key words: steelhead trout; self-ﬁning; mediter- ranean climate; california david a. boughton, sw fisheries science center, noaa fisheries, 110 shaffer road, santa cruz, ca 95060 usa; e-mail: david.boughton@noaa. gov accepted for publication july 4, 2008 introduction intermittent streams are decidedly common, and pose obvious problems for stream-dwelling ﬁsh: intermit- tency entails a seasonal shrinkage of habitats that can concentrate ﬁsh into high densities, where they are vulnerable to physiological stress, predation, and high levels of competition, and the drying of reaches restricts mobility as well as killing ﬁsh outright (gasith & resh 1999; magalhaes et al. 2002; magoulick & kobza 2003; matthews & marsh- matthews 2003; dekar & magoulick 2007). in parts of north america, 59% of total stream length appears to be either intermittent or ephemeral (nadeau & rains 2007), and occurrence of intermittency may expand in the future as climate trends convert snow- fed stream systems into rain-fed systems with reduced natural water storage and lower minimum ﬂows. such conversions are already in progress (mote et al. 2005; regonda et al. 2005; hodgkins & dudley 2006; knowles et al. 2006), and are expected to affect most of the european, asian and american continents north of 45°n, and also mountainous areas outside this region (etchevers et al. 2002; mote et al. 2003, 2005; jasper et al. 2004; leung et al. 2004; bradley et al. 2006; knowles et al. 2006; schindler & donahue 2006). but if intermittent streams pose obvious problems for ﬁsh, it is also true that much about their role in ﬁsh ecology is not obvious. erman & hawthorne (1976) observed a population of rainbow trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss) in which 39–47% of adults entered an intermittent mountain creek to spawn despite the ready availability of perennial habitat nearby. ebersole et al. (2006) showed that a creek in oregon, though nearly dry in midsummer, supported high densities of spawning coho salmon in the fall (oncorhynchus_kisutch). juveniles rearing in the creek grew rapidly in winter and emigrated as larger smolts, relative to those in perennial creeks nearby. ostrand & wilde (2002) described a prairie river system in texas that had intermittent upper reaches, and demonstrated that 92 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2008.00328.x some ﬁsh species were speciﬁcally associated with the intermittent areas. stanley et al. (1997) observed that in intermittent streams, unconstrained reaches tended to dry out sooner than constrained reaches, and this underscores the fact that seasonal patterns of drying are inextrica- bly bound up with stream geomorphology and the related processes of sediment transport and deposition during high ﬂows. this affects ﬁsh. for example, may & lee (2004) found that bedrock pools, in which annual peak ﬂows have sufﬁcient power to scour away sediment, tend to reliably maintain dry-season ﬂows and successfully support juvenile salmonids, more so than pools storing sediment. and yet many species of ﬁsh require sediment substrates – often with particular size distributions – and especially during their spawn- ing season. at the watershed scale, geomorphic processes inﬂuence the spatial distributions of both intermittent reaches with suitable substrates. one would thus expect them to exhibit nonindependent patterning, but the form of such patterning is unclear. reaches and of here, we investigate such patterning for a popula- tion of o. mykiss inhabiting a chaparral watershed in central california. oncorhynchus_mykiss spawn in winter and spring on gravel deposits falling within a particular size range (kondolf & wolman 1993), and basin-wide sorting of sediment sizes – often called ‘self-ﬁning’ – drives the broad-scale distribution of these gravels (montgomery et al. 1999; bufﬁngton et al. 2004; may & lee 2004; burnett et al. 2007). the self-ﬁning process is governed by peak ﬂows, which determine maximum stream power and interact with channel constraints to inﬂuence the competency of channels to transport and sort sediments. basin- wide trends in competency tend to produce a general progression of coarse to ﬁne sediments from headwa- ter to conﬂuence, accompanied by a predictable sequence of geomorphic channel forms (magilligan 1992; grimm et al. 1995; montgomery & bufﬁngton 1997; knighton 1999; brummer & montgomery 2003; gomez 2006). the connections between self-ﬁning and distribution of spawning habitat have been studied in forested watersheds and snow-fed stream networks, but not in more arid situations where natural water storage tends to be lower, peak ﬂows and stream power higher, and the potential for intermittency much broader. our focus here is on three alternative hypotheses for o. mykiss inhabiting a rain-fed stream network in the california chaparral. the ﬁrst is that suitably sized spawning gravels and intermittent reaches tend to co-occur due to broad-scale ﬂuvial and climatic processes, testable via an appropriate covariate anal- ysis. a corollary of the hypothesis is that winter spawning and summer rearing habitat for o. mykiss spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat may tend to get segregated to different parts of a watershed. an alternative hypothesis is that broad- scale processes may dominate patterning but not segregate the two habitats; and a third alternative is that ﬁne-scale processes could dominate, such that habitat variation is greater within streams than among them, and is not explained by covariates related to the broad scale processes. such ﬁne-scale processes include channel-spanning wood-jams that resist the self-ﬁning process and maintain spawning habitat in low-order reaches (montgomery et al. 1996; hassan et al. 2005), local forcing of channel structure by conﬂuences, rock outcrops, etc. and frequent inputs of hillside sediments (benda and dunne 1997a,b; church 2002; montgomery & bufﬁngton 1997). hill-slope inputs are especially relevant in mediterranean cli- mates, where frequent wildﬁre and intense rainfall can produce geomorphic effects of comparable magnitude to sorting processes (benda & dunne 1997b; keller et al. 1997). study area to evaluate the hypotheses, we estimated habitat and ﬁsh distribution in the principal tributaries and main- stem of the arroyo seco river in central california (fig. 1) and examined their relationships to broad- scale drivers of pattern such as clines in precipitation, drainage area and channel gradient. the basic study design was to collect observations in summer 2006 from a stratiﬁed-random sample of reaches and analyse the data using a series of multilevel bayesian statistical models (wyatt 2002, 2003; gelman et al. 2004; gelman & hill 2007), in which regression predictors were based on existing conceptual models of self-ﬁning (bufﬁngton et al. 2004). (2004), it the arroyo seco watershed drains an undeveloped 632 km2 section of the coastal santa lucia mountain range in central california. under the hydrologic- landscape system of wolock et al. is classiﬁed as semiarid mountains with permeable soils and impermeable bedrock. the mainstem arroyo seco ﬂows east to the salinas river, which ﬂows northwest to the ocean. the watershed has complex geology, a steeply dissected mixture of igneous, metamorphic and undifferentiated sedimentary rocks with much faulting. )1, exceeding the uplift of bedrock is 0.85 mmæyear ﬂuvial erosion rates by about an order of magnitude so that hillsope processes such as landslides and dry ravel are probably important components of landscape denudation (florsheim et al. 1991; ducea et al. 2003). thus, the study site gives a conservative test of that hill-slope inputs do not overwhelm broad-scale patterning. the hypothesis montane ridges and peaks have mixed evergreen forests including the large conifers pinus lambertiana, 93 boughton et al. pinus ponderosa and psuedotsuga menziesii, which are pleistocene relicts. chaparral occurs on steep slopes with grassland and oak savannah becoming prominent in the eastern areas. the hardwoods quercus, populus, platanus or acer occur along most creeks, although some reaches have steep canyon walls preventing woody vegetation, and many uncon- strained reaches are lined by thickets of salix, alnus and toxicodendron. annual precipitation on the nearby coast (at big sur station) was 1155 mm for the period 2002–2006, with higher precipitation on the ridge separating the coastal drainages from the arroyo seco watershed. a rain- shadow occurs further east, with 610 mm of precip- itation near the centre of the watershed (arroyo seco 94 fig. 1. principal tributaries of arroyo seco, including sampling locations. ranger station), and 207 mm near the river’s conﬂu- ence with the salinas river (cimis station 114). the arroyo seco river is perennial in the mountains but as its name suggests, it goes dry in the salinas valley by june of most years, due to percolation into a large aquifer. virtually all precipitation falls as rain between october and may, though snow may appear brieﬂy on high peaks in some years. the 2006 water year tended to the wet side, producing a mean annual ﬂow in the lower mainstem of 7.39 m3æs the average for the years 1902–2007 (range for 1902– )1). the ﬁsh fauna is closely 2007: 0.197–20.8 m3æs related to that of the central valley of california )1, or 154% of (moyle 2002). the arroyo seco system supports a discrete population of o. mykiss that is separated from conspeciﬁc populations by c. 100 km of low-gradient, warm-water channels composing the main-stem sali- nas river. both the ocean-going and the freshwater- resident forms of o. mykiss inhabit the watershed. although o. mykiss is a well-studied species overall, its distinctive ecology in the chaparral watersheds of southern and central california is poorly understood. material and methods sampling frame reaches from a geographic information system (gis) (boughton & goslin 2006) were stratiﬁed by main- stem and principal tributaries (fig. 1) and sampled using hierarchical randomisation (stevens & olsen 2004). we excluded reaches above barrier waterfalls and three inaccessible areas, and in cases of branching tributaries only one branch was sampled, with sam- pling probabilities adjusted accordingly (gelman & hill 2007). during june and early july 2006, sampling sites were located in the ﬁeld using a geographic positioning system with waas capabilities (gpsmap 60c; garmin international, olathe, ks, usa), and data were collected from 100-m longitudinal transects (200-m transects were used brieﬂy at the beginning). we also made ﬁeld observations to classify streams as perennial or intermittent in the year of the study. in general, the classiﬁcation of streams as ephemeral (ﬂowing brieﬂy after rainstorms), intermittent (ﬂowing for much, but not all, of the year) and perennial (ﬂowing year-round) is sensitive to the spatial and temporal scale of observations. our ﬁeld classiﬁcation was based on the fact that mediterranean climates have regular annual wet and dry seasons. we considered ephemeral tributaries to be channels that did not maintain continuous surface ﬂow between rainstorms in the wet season, and omitted them from consider- ation. we considered intermittent streams to be those maintaining surface ﬂow at the outset of the dry season but with dry sections of channel by the end of the dry season (august–september), with perennial streams being those maintaining continuous surface ﬂow through to the ﬁrst rainfall. even small sections of dry channel led us to classify a tributary as intermit- tent, as such interruptions in ﬂow would completely block the movement of ﬁsh and drifting food items through the stream, with potentially large effects on habitat quality. one principal tributary (reliz creek) and several minor tributaries or branches were found to be nearly dry by june (termed ‘‘early intermittent’’). we sur- veyed o. mykiss occurrence in the sparse collection of residual pools in reliz creek, but otherwise omitted spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat the early intermittent creeks from sampling. in late august, we hiked large sections of the other streams and categorised them as perennial tributary, intermit- tent tributary or perennial mainstem. streams were considered perennial if they had maintained continu- ous surface ﬂow throughout the extent surveyed and intermittent otherwise. it is possible that some tribu- taries judged perennial had dry sections in unsurveyed areas or that appeared in the weeks between the survey and the ﬁrst rainfall in early october. to minimise this possibility, we focused on reaches that seemed likely to go dry ﬁrst (reaches with weak ﬂows and deep, coarse alluvium) and spot-checked such reaches throughout september. spawning habitat water depth, velocity, percent ﬁnes and intragravel ﬂow are all important characteristics of spawning habitat for o. mykiss (quinn 2005), but we assumed the fundamental physical constraint to be the calibre of stream sediments, which determine whether the ﬁsh can excavate nests for spawning (bufﬁngton et al. 2004; davey & lapointe 2007). we also estimated channel morphology, which interacts with discharge to structure scour depth, water depth and velocity and intragravel ﬂow (montgomery et al. 1999; quinn 2005). to quantify broad-scale patterns of sediment calibre (montgomery & bufﬁngton 1997; church 2002), we estimated the median surface grain size (d50) for each sampled reach using a systematic pebble count (wolman 1954). individual grains were sampled at 2 m intervals along a transect approximately 45° to the thalweg, reﬂected at the banks, which was intended to sample systematically along both the longitudinal and lateral axes of the stream. the transect was followed from one end of the site to the other (100 m), generally resulting in a sample of about 100 stones. sizes of the medium axes of stones were estimated using a gravelometer, or for larger rocks, a tape measure or laser rangeﬁnder. to quantify ﬁne-scale forcing of spawning habitat, in each sampled reach we counted the number of gravel bars that were longer than 1 channel-width and associated with one of the following forcing agents: channel-spanning woody debris (>30 cm, diameter breast-height); step-pools (see below); or a bedrock channel or bedrock outcrop at the channel margin. bars were judged by eye to be gravel if nearly all particles fell within 2–32 mm diameter (which omits very coarse gravels) but we otherwise refrained from rating their quality as spawning habitat for o. mykiss. below we refer to these as ‘force bars’ to distinguish them from the self-organising gravel bars of the pool-rifﬂe type of channel morphology, which are associated with 95 boughton et al. the self-ﬁning process (see below) and were not included in the counts of force bars. channel morphology was categorised using the system of montgomery & bufﬁngton (1997), whose table 1 was converted into a ﬁeld checklist. this system categorises reaches as pool-rifﬂe, plane-bed, step pool, cascade or bedrock. many reaches were transitional – for example, plane-bed reaches with scattered step pools were not uncommon – and were assigned a primary and secondary morphology. the data were treated as an ordinal variable, as the categories correspond to increasing levels of stream power and are expected to be related to d50 (mont- gomery & bufﬁngton 1997). thus, our primary metric of the amount of spawning habitat produced by self- ﬁning was the length of reaches having suitable d50 (using criteria from kondolf & wolman 1993), but also included a secondary metric of suitable channel morphology: speciﬁcally, the occurrence of bedform roughness step-pool morphology) (montgomery & bufﬁngton 1997), believed to pro- mote beneﬁcial water ﬂow through gravel at spawning sites (e.g., quinn 2005). (pool-rifﬂe or summer habitat summer habitat was quantiﬁed directly by making summer dive counts of o. mykiss. dive counts were made by observers wearing snorkel gear and crawling slowly up the channel. oncorhynchus_mykiss were distinguished from other species by ﬁeld marks, usually parr marks. in wide reaches, two observers worked side by side and used a system of hand signals to avoid duplicate counting. observers visually clas- siﬁed ﬁsh into three size categories [fl (fork length) <10 cm, 10 cm < fl < 20 cm and fl > 20 cm), with reference to a measuring scale drawn on an underwater writing tablet. we employed dive-counting rather than electroﬁsh- ing to enable a larger sample of reaches (perhaps two to ﬁve times over) under available resources. dive counts can be precise but biased due to undercounting (detection rate less than 1) (hankin & reeves 1988). to estimate detection rate, at three calibration sites we paired dive-counting with standard depletion electro- ﬁshing (block-netting, three passes). derived observations for each dataset, we ﬁt a bayesian multilevel model and used it to predict values at unsampled reaches via probabilistic imputation (gelman et al. 2004). bayesian analyses were conducted in the r com- puting environment (r development core team 2006) using openbugs (sturtz et al. 2005; thomas et al. 2006) to estimate posterior probabilities via 96 markov-chain monte-carlo (mcmc), and package rv (kerman & gelman 2005) to conduct probabilis- tic imputation. for the counting data (dive counts, bar counts), we found the markov chains extremely slow to converge when the analysis was coded as a single bayesian model, so we broke such models into discrete steps, using posterior probability densities from one step as derived observations for the next (gelman et al. 2004, p. 141; michielsens et al. 2006). speciﬁcally, we assumed counts yi to be poisson-distributed with reference to an underlying log-density of objects yi, according to the model ð1þ yi  poissonðli10yiþ where li is the length of the sampled reach. the prior probability density for 10yi was assumed uniform between 0 and 100 items per meter of channel length. after ﬁtting eqn. (1), the posterior means of the yi were used as a derived observation in subsequent model-ﬁtting, with sampling errors assumed to be equal to the posterior variances of yi. this two-step model-ﬁtting procedure will give similar (i) the uncertainty in the counting procedure is independent of the multilevel model describing the densities and (ii) the posterior of yi is well-described by a normal distribution. our ﬁeld protocols were designed to ensure the former, and inspection of the posterior simulations indicated that the latter was a reasonable approximation. results to a single full model if a more complex model was necessary to derive median grain sizes from the pebble counts, as the probability distributions of grain sizes rarely conform (even approximately) to any of the standard probabil- ity distributions. log-transformed d50 and its variance were estimated using a bayesian version of the multinomial sampling model (petrie & diplas 2000), in which the k terms of the probability vector were speciﬁed using k ) 1 parameters in a linear predictor constrained to sum to 1.0 (see gelman et al. 2004, section 16.7). the priors were log-uniform over the interval )30, 30 relative to the kth category, which served as an intercept or reference, and the cumulative probability distribution was approximated by a series of line segments connected at the boundaries of the grain-size categories. the posterior means and vari- ances of log(d50) obtained from each site’s cumulative distribution were then used as derived observations in subsequent analysis. estimating observation rates to estimate detection rate for the dive counts, we used data from the three sites where dive counts were followed by depletion-electroﬁshing. a bayesian for ð2þ (mantyniemi et al. 2005) was the dive counts, depletion-estimator modiﬁed by adding terms modelled as yw;i  poissonðrwnw;iþ where nw,i is the number of ﬁsh (size w) between the block nets, estimated by dive counts and depletion- electroﬁshing concurrently. the parameter rw is rate of ﬁsh detected per ﬁsh in the population, given a uniform prior between 0 and 2 (i.e., completely undetectable to completely double-counted). mantyni- emi et al.’s (2005) depletion estimator has a parameter for variation in catchability, but unfortunately at least eight to ten passes are necessary to estimate this parameter, whereas our ﬁeld conditions only allowed us three passes in the morning before water temper- ature exceeded the terms of our permit (intended to prevent unnecessary mortality of this protected ﬁsh). one alternative would have been to ﬁt a standard depletion estimator, which assumes no variation in catchability, but we thought a more reasonable approach was to use an informative prior for the catchability parameter, derived from the salmo_trutta data described in mantyniemi et al. (2005). the priors for nw,i were speciﬁed as in gazey & staley (1986). we allowed medium and large ﬁsh to have higher susceptibility to electroﬁshing by modelling capture probability as cs ¼ a for small fish, and cml ¼ a þ b 1   a for medium and large fish. with a and b having uniform prior probabilities between 0 and 1. large ﬁsh were too rare to be parameterised separately from medium. the posteriors of rw were log-transformed and summarised as mean and variance for detection rate (^rw and ^rr;w), which were used as derived observations in the multilevel statistical models. multilevel statistical models the data on channel morphology and the derived observations for d50, bar density and ﬁsh density were analysed using linear models of the general form ð3þ yi ¼ a þ bxi þ eiðjþ þ ej þ eobs:i where yi is the derived observation at reach i, a is an intercept, bxi is a vector product of covariates and regression weights (used only in the model for d50) and the e terms refer to normally distributed variation from various sources: variation among reaches within a stream [ei(j)  n(0, rcrk j)], variation among streams [ej  n(0, rall)], and variation from observation error spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat [eobs.i  n(0, ^robs:i), where ^robs:i is the derived term for sampling error described earlier]. the term rcrk j was simpliﬁed to rcrk (all creeks with same site-level variation) if warranted by model-checking. we used the models and multiple imputation to estimate the distribution of spawning habitat and summering habitat among the three categories of stream (perennial mainstem, perennial tributary and intermittent tribu- tary). the range of values of d50 considered suitable for spawning steelhead were taken from kondolf & wolman (1993). to evaluate the role of self-ﬁning, we examined covariates expected to be related to log-d50 under a theoretical model of self-ﬁning (bufﬁngton et al. 2004). speciﬁcally, choice of covariates was based on the theoretical expectation that median sediment calibre is a log-linear function of channel gradient and bank-full discharge for transport-limited reaches. as in bufﬁngton et al. (2004), the covariates were log-transformed values of channel gradient and watershed contributing area, the latter being a proxy for bank-full discharge. we added a covariate for mean annual precipitation (log-transformed), which would also be expected to inﬂuence bank-full discharge. covariates were estimated using the gis (similar to the methods of burnett et al. 2007), including a digital precipitation map obtained from the climate source, corvallis oregon (daly et al. 1994). we had no speciﬁc prior knowledge about the strength of the covariates in chaparral watersheds and therefore assigned vague priors to their regression weights (uniform [)30, 30]). the role of downstream ﬁning was thus judged via the strength of covariates, whereas other (competing) processes would be subsumed under the reach- and stream-speciﬁc effects of the model (parameters rcrk j and rall). these include small-scale changes in surface ﬂow and input of coarse sediments from hillslopes and side channels (benda and dunne 1997a,b; constantine et al. 2003; davey & lapointe 2007; mueller & pitlick 2005). in the model for gravel bars produced by local- forcing rather than self-ﬁning, the prediction of bar occurrence was conditional on reach-level d50 being unsuitable for steelhead spawning. in the model for summer habitat, ﬁsh density was estimated as ð4þ kw;i ¼ aw þ ew;i þ ew;j þ ew;obs:i þ ew;k þ ^rw; )1 of channel for where kw,i is the log-density of ﬁsh m size class w in reach i. the parameter ^rw is an offset to q ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ correct for imperfect detection during dive counts, and we assumed that ew;obs:i  nð0; r;w þ ^r2 ^r2 [the second term is the posterior variance for the log- density of observed ﬁsh, from eq. (1)]. the terms ^rw k:w;i 97 intervals of the regression weights overlapped zero. in contrast, the precipitation gradient had an unambigu- ous positive association with median grain size (fig. 3). the regression weights in fig. 3 are for standardised covariates (l = 0 and r = 1) and under- represent the inﬂuence of the precipitation gradient relative to contributing area – untransformed, the contributing areas of sample sites covered 2.4 orders of magnitude, whereas precipitation covered only 0.23 yet had a stronger association. out-of-sample predic- tive power of the model (as indicated by dic; see spiegelhalter et al. 2002) was notably degraded by omitting precipitation, but was slightly improved by omitting contributing area (table 1). a common assumption in the literature is that unit stream power and shear stress scale to the contributing area (mont- gomery et al. 1996; bufﬁngton et al. 2004), but our data demonstrate that precipitation gradients can be more important than drainage area in determining patterns of d50. this broadened the spatial scale of patterning as drainage area varied more within the tributaries than across them, whereas precipitation varied most across the tributaries. predictive power was also degraded by assuming that all streams had equal variances of d50 among reaches – i.e., we found heterogeneity in the hetero- geneity of creeks (fig. 4). this was probably due mostly to ﬁne-scale hillslope processes or conﬂuence boughton et al. and ^r2 r;w are mean and variance of log-detection rate estimated from calibration sites (eq. 2). other terms are as in eq. (3) except as follows: covariates did not improve out-of-sample predictive power [deviance information criterion (dic); spiegelhalter et al. 2002] and were omitted. the term ew,k was added to capture the effect of stream type (mainstem, perennial tribu- taries and intermittent though a model without it gave similar predictions and had a similar dic score. tributaries), results intermittency we ﬁeld-checked intermittency of the principal tribu- taries of arroyo seco in early june of 2006 and again in late august, and found it to be related to mean annual precipitation in the contributing area of the tributary (fig. 2). in july, we intensively explored reliz creek, the largest early intermittent tributary, and found only a few widely separated residual pools, all without o. mykiss; this creek was omitted from subsequent analysis. the other principal tributaries maintained continuous surface ﬂow through june, and most through july, but by the end of august some had dry sections extending for many kilometres, but also sections of surface ﬂow, particularly in bedrock areas. in these intermittent streams, we observed numerous o. mykiss dead in dried channels or trapped in rapidly shrinking pools. general distribution of spawning habitat as predicted by self-ﬁning models, the median calibre of surface grains in stream reaches (d50) was associ- ated positively with channel gradient and negatively with contributing watershed area, but the 95% credible fig. 3. weights (betas) for covariates in the model of median surface grain size, scaled as change in log(d50) per unit standard- deviation change in the covariate. symbols are medians with 50% and 95% credible intervals. table 1. deviance information criterion (dic) for competing linear models of median surface grain size (d50). regression model full model gradient term removed (bs = 0) area term removed (ba = 0) precip. term removed (bp = 0) equal stream variances (rcrk.1 = rcrk.2 = …rcrk.j) dic 107.9 107.4 106.2 115.3 120.0 fig. 2. intermittency and mean annual precipitation in the con- tributing areas of tributaries to arroyo seco. the ‘intermittent by june’ category includes two large branches of an ‘intermittent by september’ tributary in the northern watershed (see fig. 1). bars are sd among tributaries. 98 spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat fig. 5. cumulative length of reaches with d50 suitable for steelhead spawning. symbols are medians with 50% and 95% credible intervals. local-forcing of spawning habitat of the forced gravel bars predicted to occur in the watershed, only 17% were associated with coarse woody debris (95% ci: 11–27%). most (61%) forced bars were associated with bedrock outcrops or channels (95% ci: 48–73%), with the remaining 21% being associated with step pools (95% ci: 14–32%). the density of gravel bars (per unit stream length) associated with bedrock was greater than the density of other types in the mainstem and perennial tributaries (fig. 6). the mainstem was predicted to contain about half the forced gravel bars (48%; ci 35–62%), somewhere between 2500 and 6500 separate force bars in areas where d50 for the reach as a whole was otherwise too coarse for spawning. the perennial creeks were predicted to contain 36% of the forced gravel bars (95% ci 26–47%), with the remaining 16% in the intermittent creeks (95% ci 11–23%). summertime distribution of oncorhynchus_mykiss detection rate for dive counts of o. mykiss was 0.87 per capita for ﬁsh <10 cm fork length (95% ci: 0.79– 0.94), and 0.75 per capita for larger ﬁsh (95% ci: 0.86–1.13). the mean density of ﬁsh by body size and 99 fig. 4. components of variance in log(d50) from parameters of the multilevel statistical model. the horizontal line marks the median estimate for variation due to the covariates, computed from the standard deviation of the bxi terms of eq. (3) using the posteriors of b. the others estimates are posteriors of rcrk j and rall. symbols are medians with 50% and 95% credible intervals. effects in the mainstem. figure 4 also shows variation in log(d50) among creeks (including the portion attributed to the covariates). among-creek variation was greater than within-creek variation for some tributaries but not for others, suggesting that both broad-scale inﬂuence log(d50). even so, according to the full model, most of the reaches with d50 suitable for spawning occurred in the low-rainfall part of the watershed, indicating the overall importance of broad-scale self-ﬁning processes that focused spawning habitat into the intermittent tributaries and the mainstem (fig. 5). processes and ﬁne-scale bedform roughness (pool-rifﬂe or step-pool mor- phology) (montgomery & bufﬁngton 1997), believed to promote beneﬁcial water ﬂow through gravel at spawning sites (e.g., quinn 2005), was present at three-quarters of the sites with suitable d50. also shown in fig. 5 are predictions for the tributaries that were intermittent by june. these were not part of the original sampling frame and thus the predictions are less certain, but it is interesting that they are predicted to provide substantially more spawning habitat than either the late-intermittent or perennial tributaries. boughton et al. fig. 6. mean density of forced gravel bars for different categories of stream and forcing agent. values for intermittent tributaries omit the ‘early intermittent’ category of stream. fig. 7. mean density of oncorhynchus_mykiss by stream category and ﬁsh size. circles are median estimates of mean density; error bars denote 50% and 95% credible intervals. means weighted by stream lengths. values for intermittent tributaries omit the ‘early intermittent’ category of stream. stream type showed a striking pattern (fig. 7). mean densities of small o. mykiss were very similar in intermittent and perennial tributaries. the densities in intermittent streams do not represent forced aggrega- tions due to drying, as they were standardised per unit length of channel rather than wetted area. small ﬁsh were rare in the mainstem, where spawning habitat was most abundant but daytime water temperatures in summer were 23–28 °c (fig. 8) and a warm-water predatory ﬁsh, ptychocheilus grandis, was extremely abundant. larger o. mykiss were also rare in the mainstem, and most common in the perennial tribu- taries (fig. 7). revisiting the original general hypotheses, the data as a whole indicated broad-scale spatial patterning of habitat, such that most of the reaches with suitable d50 were in the intermittent tributaries or in the mainstem (fig. 5). the patterns of intermittency and d50 both appeared to be related to the precipitation cline (figs. 2 and 3). for d50 there was substantial variation that was not related to covariates and was potentially driven by ﬁner-scale mechanisms such as hill-slope inputs or conﬂuence effects, but it was not sufﬁcient to dominate the broader scale patterning mechanisms (table 1, fig. 5). other forcing mechanisms that might produce gravel bars locally were quite rare, except for rock outcrops. the force-bars associated with rock outcrops were mostly in the mainstem which, though perennial, tended to be too warm for high summer densities of 100 fig. 8. water temperatures observed at sampled reaches during dive counts. the data are from an onset water temperature logger placed in the main current of each reach for the duration of data- collection activities at the site, typically 1–3 h. o. mykiss (fig. 8). in contrast to spawning habitat, the larger size classes of o. mykiss, most of which had probably already survived at least one summer (i.e., spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat occur in the perennial tributaries. these data suggest that spawning was widespread in the intermittent tributaries (and perhaps the mainstem), but that survival past the ﬁrst year occurred mainly in the tributaries. however, some survival may perennial occur in perennial headwater areas of otherwise intermittent creeks. the mainstem had both spawning gravels and perennial ﬂow but was mostly too warm for oversummering, probably due to hot air temper- atures and a general lack of vegetative cover. the results support the hypothesis of a spatial disjunction of spawning and summering habitat, maintained by climatic and geomorphic processes ultimately tied to elevation and the meteorological temperature-lapse rate. the disjunction appeared to be exacerbated by a scarcity of coarse woody debris, which in coniferous montane watersheds is common and forces pool formation and gravel retention in reaches that are otherwise too steep or exhibit bankfull discharges to retain signiﬁcant gravel (montgomery et al. 1996; bufﬁngton et al. 2004). in the study area, most coniferous forests were on ridgetops and most of the instream coarse woody debris that we observed derived from hardwood species, which are less effective geomorphic agents compared to conifers (opperman 2005). our data suggest that bedrock outcrops and channels partly compensated for the lack of wood, especially in the perennial tributaries. too great the actual usage of these conclusions, however, are based on a single season of observations for o. mykiss distribution, and a fairly simple approach to characterising the spawn- ing habitat. although appropriate gravel sizes and bedform roughness are important for survival of eggs and fry, so are numerous other biotic and abiotic factors which we did not attempt to quantify. more importantly, the habitat by spawning adults was not examined; this would be quite difﬁcult due to turbid and hazardous water conditions and difﬁcult access to much of the ﬁeld site during the winter and spring months (large sections of the watershed are accessible only via low-water bridges or hiking up stream channels). most of the anecdotal reports of steelhead spawning are from the eastern tributaries and mainstem, supporting our general conclusions; however, this is the only part of the watershed with year-round human residents so there is a potential observer bias. finally, we should note that the log-normal models at the heart of our statistical analysis can have poor robustness relative to more complex mixture models (dorazio et al. 2007). implications for salmonid productivity the most striking result was that small o. mykiss, probably mostly young-of-the-year, maintained very 101 fig. 9. proportional abundance of spawning habitat (channel with suitable d50) and summer habitat, the latter indicated by two size classes of oncorhynchus_mykiss in june–july 2006. proportions were computed from abundances estimated using randomly sampled reaches, a multilevel statistical model, and multiple imputation to infer abundances at unsampled sites. symbols are median estimates with 50% and 95% credible intervals. were 1+), had the highest density in the perennial tributaries (fig. 7). the predicted abundances of ﬁsh and habitat were used to estimate their proportional abundance in each stream category (fig. 9). the proportional abundances depicted in fig. 9 strongly support the segregation hypothesis of winter spawning and summer rearing habitats being concentrated in different parts of the watershed. the distribution of small ﬁsh, probably consisting mostly of young-of-the- year, was intermediate between that of spawning habitat and of larger ﬁsh. this strongly suggests that substantial spawning had occurred in the intermittent tributaries the previous winter. discussion geomorphic processes and salmonid habitat the data indicated that the largest aggregations of spawning gravel occurred in the drier eastern part of the watershed, while the cool perennial tributaries were in the western part where winter rainfall was highest and summer air temperatures were coolest. densities of the smallest ﬁsh were similar in both types of creek, but the larger size classes tended to boughton et al. similar densities in intermittent and perennial creeks during the ﬁrst part of the summer. the species’ longer-term dynamics of habitat use are not known for the study area, nor for other ecologically comparable watersheds in the region, but salmonids are known to spawn in intermittent streams (erman & hawthorne 1976; ebersole et al. 2006), and more generally their reproductive behaviour and population dynamics are sensitive to stream discharge (e.g., lobon-cervia & mortensen 2005; gortazar et al. 2007; lobon-cervia 2007). however, we are not aware of work that has documented the use of intermittent habitats at the magnitude and scale observed in this study. the data were consistent with the hypothesis that spawning habitat occurred in intermittent streams not by chance, but due to the combined action of orographic rainfall patterns and the self-ﬁning process. this conclusion was based on analysis of covariates (especially an interpolated map of mean annual precipitation generated using methods of daly et al. 1994), and there is always a possibility of a spurious correlation. this would imply an alternative explana- tion for the spatial pattern observed, perhaps arising from the geological structure of the range. the geology is quite complex; however, there is no obvious confounded variable, as a single rocktype, sandstone, is prominent in both the driest and the wettest parts of the watershed. it is interesting that annual precipitation has more explanatory power for d50 than contributing area of the watershed, as the latter is sometimes assumed to be of primary importance in snow-fed and coniferous systems (montgomery et al. 1996; bufﬁngton et al. 2004). in many parts of their range, o. mykiss inhabit snow-fed mountain streams that more effectively store water for summer discharge than the rain-fed system observed in our study. however, many of these are expected to convert to rain-fed systems due to climate change. under a given amount of annual precipitation, such conversion will produce larger peak ﬂows in winter and lower minimum ﬂows in summer, with attendant implications for a shift in self-ﬁning pro- cesses and patterns of intermittency respectively. in the study area, the ﬁtness of young-of-the-year hatching in the eastern spawning areas should depend strongly on their ability to emigrate to the western tributaries before they succumb to warm perennial temperatures, predators, or stream intermittency. extensive movements of juvenile salmonids are now recognised to be common and ﬁtness-enhancing (e.g., kahler et al. 2001; bramblett et al. 2002; ebersole et al. 2006), but einum et al. (2006) presented data on salmo_salar suggesting that the ability to disperse develops progressively, as a function of body size. he proposed a general model for vertebrates with inde- terminate growth, in which resource-shortages for 102 newly hatched juveniles result in mortality (milner et al. 2003), but for larger juveniles they result more often in emigration or decreased growth rates (grant et al. 1998; keeley 2001, 2003; sutherland & norris 2002; imre et al. 2004; lobon-cervia 2005; einum et al. 2006). kahler et al. (2001) found that juvenile emigration in oncorhynchus tended to occur from poor (shallow) sites and resulted in enhanced growth elsewhere. one hypothesis is that such dynamics would tend to produce a behaviourally mediated ‘buffer effect’ on population dynamics (grant et al. 1998; keeley 2001, 2003; sutherland & norris 2002; imre et al. 2004; einum et al. 2006). our data suggest that in the chaparral watersheds of intermittency would tend to southern california, disrupt any buffer effect by fragmenting the stream network each summer; the spatial segregation of habitats would increase the fraction of affected young-of-the-year (kocik & ferreri 1998). although o. mykiss has had much time to adapt to the environment of southern california, the historical record suggests that runs of anadromous o. mykiss in the region have always been exceptionally variable, and the pattern of seasonal fragmentation (a threshold effect sensitive to annual rainfall) indicates a possible mechanism. the mean density of o. mykiss at our sites )2 (sd = 0.178), about half the was 0.155 ﬁsh per m mean for the heavily forested coastal region to the north (platts & mchenry 1988). signiﬁcantly, some of the earliest-drying parts of the intermittent tributaries occurred just above their con- ﬂuences, where they emerged from steep side canyons onto the unconstrained ﬂoodplain of the mainstem. this pattern cut off the possibility of emigration from intermittent creeks early in the seasonal drying process. this sort of bottom-up drying pattern might have greater mortality impacts than a top–down pattern, as the ﬁsh would retain a greater number of dispersal options for a longer time in the top–down pattern. on the other hand, a top–down pattern would force the ﬁsh down to warmer reaches during the height of summer, whereas the bottom–up pattern gives them a retreat to relatively cool headwater areas, and blocks immigration by warm water predators such as p. grandis during the late summer. in fact, during the sometimes observed p. grandis and other warm-water ﬁsh species at some of our perennial dive-count sites, from which they had obviously been absent when the dive counts were made earlier in the summer. reconnaissance, we late august if there is merit to our hypothesis of a functional link between intermittency and occurrence of spawn- ing habitat, then the disruptive pattern of habitat segregation that we observed may be more general, and perhaps would spread under scenarios of conver- sion of stream networks from snow-fed to rain-fed. ultimately, any long-term process of habitat segrega- tion in warming mountain ranges may depend sensi- tively on expansion or contraction of forests at a regional scale (hayhoe et al. 2004), as occurrence of forest places an upper bound on inputs of coarse woody debris to stream channels. although warming and stream conversion may unfold progressively over the course of decades, the changes in habitat that it enables – redistribution of gravels and instream wood via ﬂoods and loss of conifers via die-off or wildﬁre – involve nonlinearities and threshold effects, storage effects, and complex interactions with topography and with each other (macklin & lewin 2003; zelt & wohl 2004; coulthard et al. 2005; schumacher et al. 2006; lane et al. 2007). in short, there is great potential for surprises. currently, large winter peak ﬂows and intermittent summer ﬂows are typical for the stream networks inhabited by o. mykiss in the southernmost part of its natural range, and of course in other stream networks with mediterranean climates (gasith & resh 1999). the pattern of habitat segregation that we observed appears to be functionally related to such hydrographic patterns. it would be interesting if the functional relationship generalised to other regions with season- ally intermittent creeks and other ﬁsh species with particular substrate requirements. acknowledgements we thank w. cotton, h. williams, c. fischer, l. smith, l. gould, l. borzini, k. malengo and the san francisco zen center for providing access to ﬁeld sites. noaa fisheries, sw fisheries science center funded the work. s.t. lindley, d. rundio, p. adams, and e. danner provided helpful comments on the manuscript. references benda, l. & dunne, t. 1997a. stochastic forcing of sediment routing and storage in channel networks. water resources research 33: 2865–2880. benda, l. & dunne, t. 1997b. stochastic forcing of sediment supply to channel networks from landsliding and debris ﬂow. water resources research 33: 2849–2863. boughton, d.a. & goslin, m. 2006. potential steelhead over- summering habitat in the south-central ⁄ southern california coast recovery domain: maps based on the envelope method. noaa technical memorandum nmfs-swfsc-391. noaa fisheries, us dept. of commerce, washington dc. bradley, r.s., vuille, m., diaz, h.f. & vergara, w. 2006. threats to water supplies in the tropical andes. science 312: 1755–1756. bramblett, r.g., bryant, m.d., wright, b.e. & white, r.g. 2002. seasonal use of small tributary and main-stem habitats by juvenile steelhead, coho salmon, and dolly varden in a southeastern alaska drainage basin. transactions of the american fisheries society 131: 498–506. spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat brummer, c.j. & montgomery, d.r. 2003. downstream coarsening in headwater channels. water resources research 39: 10, 1294, doi: 10.1029/2003wr001981, 2003. bufﬁngton, j.m., montgomery, d.r. & greenberg, h.m. 2004. basin-scale availability of salmonid spawning gravel as inﬂuenced by channel type and hydraulic roughness in mountain catchments. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 61: 2085–2096. burnett, k.m., reeves, g.h., miller, d.j., clarke, s., vance- borland, k. & christiansen, k. 2007. distribution of salmon- habitat potential relative to landscape characteristics and implications for conservation. ecological applications 17: 66–80. church, m. 2002. geomorphic thresholds in riverine land- scapes. freshwater biology 47: 541–557. constantine, c.r., mount, m.f. & florsheim, j.l. 2003. the effects of longitudinal differences in gravel mobility on the downstream ﬁning pattern in the cosumnes river, california. journal of geology 111: 233–241. coulthard, t.j., lewin, j. & macklin, m.g. 2005. modelling differential catchment response to environmental change. geomorphology 69: 222–241. daly, c., neilson, r.p. & phillips, d.l. 1994. a statistical topographic model for mapping climatological precipitation over mountainous terrain. journal of applied meteorology 33: 140–158. davey, c. & lapointe, m. 2007. sedimentary links and the spatial organization of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar) spawn- ing habitat in a canadian shield river. geomorphology 83: 82–96. dekar, m.p. & magoulick, d.d. 2007. factors affecting ﬁsh assemblage structure during seasonal stream drying. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 335–342. dorazio, r.m., mukherjee, b, zhang, l., ghosh, l., jelks, h.l. & jordan, f. 2007. modeling unobserved sources of heter- ogeneity in animal abundance using a dirichlet process prior. biometrics 64: 635–644. ducea, m., house, m.a. & kidder, s. 2003. late cenozoic denudation and uplift rates in the santa lucia mountains, california. geology 31: 139–142. ebersole, j.l., wigington, p.j., baker, j.p., cairns, m.a., church, m.r., hansen, b.p., miller, b.a., lavigne, h.r., compton, j.e. & leibowitz, s.g. 2006. juvenile coho salmon growth and survival across stream network seasonal habitats. transactions of the american fisheries society 135: 1681–1697. einum, s., sundt-hansen, l. & nislow, k.h. 2006. the partitioning of density-dependent dispersal, growth and survival throughout ontogeny in a highly fecund organism. oikos 113: 489–496. erman, d.c. & hawthorne, v.m. 1976. quantitative importance of an intermittent stream in spawning of rainbow-trout. transactions of the american fisheries society 105: 675–681. etchevers, p., golaz, c., habets, f. & noilhan, j. 2002. impact of a climate change on the rhone river catchment hydrology. journal of geophysical research atmospheres 107: d16, 4293, doi: 10.1029/2001jd000409. florsheim, j.l., keller, e.a. & best, d.w. 1991. fluvial sediment transport in response to moderate storm ﬂows following chaparral wildﬁre, ventura county, southern california. geological society of america bulletin 103: 504–511. 103 boughton et al. gasith, a. & resh, v.h. 1999. streams in mediterranean climate regions: abiotic inﬂuences and biotic responses to predictable seasonal events. annual review of ecology and systematics 30: 51–81. gazey, w.j. & staley, m.j. 1986. population estimation from mark-recapture experiments using a sequential bayes algo- rithm. ecology 67: 941–951. gelman, a. & hill, j. 2007. data analysis using regression and multilevel ⁄ hierarchical models. cambridge: cambridge uni- versity press. gelman, a., carlin, j.b., stern, h.s. & rubin, d.b. 2004. bayesian data analysis. boca raton: chapman & hall ⁄ crc. gomez, b. 2006. the potential rate of bed-load transport. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america 103: 17170–17173. gortazar, j., de jalon, d.g., alonso-gonzalez, c., vizcaino, p., baeza, d. & marchamalo, m. 2007. spawning period of a southern brown_trout population in a highly unpredictable stream. ecology of freshwater fish 16: 515–527. grant, j.w.a., steingrimsson, s.o., keeley, e.r. & cunjak, r.a. 1998. implications of territory size for the measurement and prediction of salmonid abundance in streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 181–190. grimm, m.m., wohl, e.e. & jarrett, r.d. 1995. coarse-sediment distribution as evidence of an elevation limit for ﬂash ﬂooding, bear creek, colorado. geomorphology 14: 199–210. hankin, d.g. & reeves, g.h. 1988. estimating total ﬁsh abundance and total habitat area in small streams based on visual estimation methods. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 45: 834–844. hassan, m.a., hogan, d.l., bird, s.a., may, c.l., gomi, t. & campbell, d. 2005. spatial and temporal dynamics of wood in headwater streams of the paciﬁc northwest. journal of the american water resources association 41: 899–919. hayhoe, k., cayan, d., field, c.b., frumhoff, p.c., maurer, e.p., miller, n.l., moser, s.c., schneider, s.h., cahill, k.n., cle- land, e.e., dale, l., drapek, r., hanemann, r.m., kalkstein, l.s., lenihan, j., lunch, c.k., neilson, r.p., sheridan, s.c. & verville, j.h. 2004. emissions pathways, climate change, and impacts on california. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america 101: 12422–12427. hodgkins, g.a. & dudley, r.w. 2006. changes in the timing of winter-spring streamﬂows in eastern north america, 1913- 2002. geophysical research letters 33: lo6402, doi: 10.1029/2005glo25593. imre, i., grant, j.w.a. & keeley, e.r. 2004. the effect of food abundance on territory size and population density of juvenile steelhead trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss). oecologia 138: 371– 378. jasper, k., calanca, p., gyalistras, d. & fuhrer, j. 2004. differential impacts of climate change on the hydrology of two alpine river basins. climate research 26: 113–129. kahler, t.h., roni, p. & quinn, t.p. 2001. summer movement and growth of juvenile anadromous salmonids in small western washington streams. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 58: 1947–1956. keeley, e.r. 2001. demographic responses to food and space competition by juvenile steelhead trout. ecology 82: 1247– 1259. keeley, e.r. 2003. an experimental analysis of self-thinning in juvenile steelhead trout. oikos 102: 543–550. 104 keller, e.a., valentine, d.w. & gibbs, d.r. 1997. hydrolog- ical response of small watersheds following the southern california painted cave fire of june 1990. hydrological processes 11: 401–414. kerman, j. & gelman, a. 2005. manipulating and summarizing posterior simulations using random variable objects. statistics and computing 17: 235–244. knighton, a.d. 1999. downstream variation in stream power. geomorphology 29: 293–306. knowles, n., dettinger, m.d. & cayan, d.r. 2006. trends in snowfall versus rainfall in the western united states. journal of climate 19: 4545–4559. kocik, j.f. & ferreri, c.p. 1998. juvenile production variation in salmonids: population dynamics, habitat, and the role of spatial relationships. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 55: 191–200. kondolf, g.m. & wolman, m.g. 1993. the sizes of salmonid spawning gravels. water resources research 29: 2275–2285. lane, s.n., tayeﬁ, v., reid, s.c., yu, d. & hardy, r.j. 2007. interactions between sediment delivery, channel change, climate change and ﬂood risk in a temperate upland environ- ment. earth surface processes and landforms 32: 429–446. leung, l.r., qian, y., bian, x.d., washington, w.m., han, j.g. & roads, j.o. 2004. mid-century ensemble regional climate change scenarios for the western united states. climatic change 62: 75–113. lobon-cervia, j. 2005. spatial and temporal variation in the inﬂuence of density dependence on growth of stream-living brown_trout (salmo_trutta). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 62: 1231–1242. lobon-cervia, j. 2007. numerical changes in stream-resident brown_trout (salmo_trutta): uncovering the roles of density- dependent and density-independent factors across space and time. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 64: 1429–1447. lobon-cervia, j. & mortensen, e. 2005. population size in stream-living juveniles of lake-migratory brown_trout salmo_trutta l.: the importance of stream discharge and temperature. ecology of freshwater fish 14: 394–401. macklin, m.g. & lewin, j. 2003. river sediments, great ﬂoods and centennial-scale holocene climate change. journal of quaternary science 18: 101–105. magalhaes, m.f., beja, p., canas, c. & collares-pereira, m.j. 2002. functional heterogeneity of dry-season ﬁsh refugia across a mediterranean catchment: the role of habitat and predation. freshwater biology 47: 1919–1934. magilligan, f.j. 1992. thresholds and the spatial variability of ﬂood power during extreme ﬂoods. geomorphology 5: 373– 390. magoulick, d.d. & kobza, r.m. 2003. the role of refugia for ﬁshes during drought: a review and synthesis. freshwater biology 48: 1186–1198. mantyniemi, s., romakkaniemi, a. & arjas, e. 2005. bayesian removal estimation of a population size under unequal catchability. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 62: 291–300. matthews, w.j. & marsh-matthews, e. 2003. effects of drought on ﬁsh across axes of space, time and ecological complexity. freshwater biology 48: 1232–1253. may, c.l. & lee, d.c. 2004. the relationships among storage, pool depth, and summer in-channel sediment survival of juvenile salmonids in oregon coast range streams. north american journal of fisheries management 24: 761–774. michielsens, c.g.j., mcallister, m.k., kuikka, s., pakarinen, t., karlsson, l., romakkaniemi, a., pera, i. & mantyniemi, s. 2006. a bayesian state-space mark-recapture model to estimate exploitation rates in mixed-stock ﬁsheries. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 63: 321–334. milner, n.j., elliott, j.m., armstrong, j.d., gardiner, r., welton, j.s. & ladle, m. 2003. the natural control of salmon and trout populations in streams. fisheries research 62: 111–125. montgomery, d.r. & bufﬁngton, j.m. 1997. channel-reach morphology in mountain drainage basins. geological society of america bulletin 109: 596–611. montgomery, d.r., abbe, t.b., bufﬁngton, j.m., peterson, n.p., schmidt, k.m. & stock, j.d. 1996. distribution of bedrock and alluvial channels in forested mountain drainage basins. nature 381: 587–589. montgomery, d.r., beamer, e.m., pess, g.r. & quinn, t.p. 1999. channel type and salmonid spawning distribution and abundance. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 56: 377–387. mote, p.w., parson, e., hamlet, a.f., keeton, w.s., lettenma- ier, d., mantua, n., miles, e.l., peterson, d., peterson, d.l., slaughter, r. & snover, a.k. 2003. preparing for climatic change: the water, salmon, and forests of the paciﬁc northwest. climatic change 61: 45–88. mote, p.w., hamlet, a.f., clark, m.p. & lettenmaier, d.p. 2005. declining mountain snowpack in western north am erica. bulletin of the american meteorological society 86: 39–49. moyle, p.b. 2002. inland ﬁshes of california. berkeley: university of california press, xv, 502 pp. mueller, e.r. & pitlick, j. 2005. morphologically based model of bed load transport capacity in a headwater stream. journal of geophysical research earth surface 110: fo2016, doi: 10.1029/2003jf000117. nadeau, t.l. & rains, m.c. 2007. hydrological connectivity between headwater streams and downstream waters: how science can inform policy. journal of the american water resources association 43: 118–133. opperman, j.j. 2005. large woody debris and land manage- ment in california’s hardwood-dominated watersheds. envi- ronmental management 35: 266–277. ostrand, k.g. & wilde, g.r. 2002. seasonal and spatial variation in a prairie stream-ﬁsh assemblage. ecology of freshwater fish 11: 137–149. petrie, j. & diplas, p. 2000. statistical approach to sedi- ment sampling accuracy. water resources research 36: 597– 605. platts, w.s. & mchenry, m.l. 1988. density and biomass of trout and char in western streams. general technical report int-241. ogden, ut: u.s. department of agriculture, forest service, 17 pp. spatial patterning of o. mykiss habitat quinn, t.p. 2005. the behavior and ecology of paciﬁc salmon & trout. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, 378 pp. r development core team. 2006. r: a language and environment for statistical computing. vienna, austria: r foundation for statistical computing. regonda, s.k., rajagopalan, b., clark, m. & pitlick, j. 2005. seasonal cycle shifts in hydroclimatology over the western united states. journal of climate 18: 372–384. schindler, d.w. & donahue, w.f. 2006. an impending water crisis in canada’s western prairie provinces. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america 103: 7210–7216. schumacher, s., reineking, b., sibold, j. & bugmann, h. 2006. modeling the impact of climate and vegetation on ﬁre regimes in mountain landscapes. landscape ecology 21: 539–554. spiegelhalter, d.j., best, n.g., carlin, b.r. & van der linde, a. 2002. bayesian measures of model complexity and ﬁt. journal of the royal statistical society series b statistical methodology 64: 583–616. stanley, e.h., fisher, s.g. & grimm, n.b. 1997. ecosystem expansion and contraction in streams. bioscience 47: 427– 435. stevens, d.l. & olsen, a.r. 2004. spatially balanced sampling of natural resources. journal of the american statistical association 99: 262–278. sturtz, s., ligges, u. & gelman, a. 2005. r2winbugs: a package for running winbugs from r. journal of statistical software 12: 1–16. sutherland, w.j. & norris, k. 2002. behavioural models of population growth rates: implications for conservation and prediction. philosophical transactions of the royal society of london series b biological sciences 357: 1273–1284. thomas, a., o’hara, b., ligges, u. & sturtz, s. 2006. making bugs open. r news 6: 12–17. wolman, m.g. 1954. a method of sampling coarse river-bed material. eos transactions agu 35: 951–956. wolock, d.m., winter, t.c. & mcmahon, g. 2004. delineation and evaluation of hydrologic-landscape regions in the united states using geographic information system tools and mul- tivariate statistical analyses. environmental management 34: s71–s88. wyatt, r.j. 2002. estimating riverine ﬁsh population size from single- and multiple-pass removal sampling using a hierar- chical model. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 59: 695–706. wyatt, r.j. 2003. mapping the abundance of riverine ﬁsh populations: integrating hierarchical bayesian models with a geographic information system (gis). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 60: 997–1006. zelt, r.b. & wohl, e.e. 2004. channel and woody debris characteristics in adjacent burned and unburned watersheds a decade after wildﬁre, park county, wyoming. geomorphol- ogy 57: 217–233. 105  