ecology of freshwater fish 2004: 13: 305–311 printed in denmark æ all rights reserved copyright ó blackwell munksgaard 2004 ecology of freshwater fish modelling the life-history variation of arctic charr rikardsen ah, thorpe je, dempson jb. modelling the life-history variation of arctic charr. ecology of freshwater fish 2004: 13: 305–311. ó blackwell munksgaard, 2004 abstract – a model based on proximate considerations of life histories of atlantic salmon, salmo_salar, was examined for its applicability to ﬁt the variation in life-history of wild arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus, based on a qualitative assessment of information related to growth and lipid dynamics of arctic charr. the original salmon model is discussed in context of modiﬁcations required to account for added complexities in the life history of arctic charr in relation to anadromy versus residency. a study from north norway shows that individual charr that emigrate from the lakes to the sea, maintain a high growth rate in the lake in late summer and early autumn compared with resident ﬁsh. their relatively low lipid level in autumn combined with a high rate of change of lipid during winter was associated with postponement of maturation in the anadromous individuals. individuals that remain resident in the lake arrested growth in autumn. their high lipid level in autumn combined with a low rate of change of lipid during winter was associated with maturation the following summer, without emigration from freshwater. results from this and other related studies show similarities with the model derived from lipid and growth dynamics of atlantic salmon. the adjusted charr model illustrates possible proximate explanations for the high variation in life-history strategies of arctic charr. however, the model does not account for the characteristic return migration of immature charr into freshwater several weeks after their entry to the sea. the proximate physiological stimulus for this movement of immature ﬁsh is not entirely clear. a. h. rikardsen1, j. e. thorpe2, j. b. dempson3 1norwegian institute for nature research, tromsø, norway, 2institute of biomedical and life sciences, university of glasgow, glasgow, uk, 3fisheries and oceans canada, st john’s, nf, canada key words: growth; maturation; lipid; energy; smolt; salmonid ﬁsh; salmon; trout; phenotypic plasticity; salvelinus_alpinus; anadromy a. h. rikardsen, norwegian institute for nature research, n-9296 tromsø, norway; e-mail: audun.rikardsen@nina.no accepted for publication september 16, 2004 un resumen en espan˜ ol se incluye detra´s del texto principal de este artı´culo. introduction the arctic charr [salvelinus_alpinus (l.)] displays a high variety of life histories both between and within populations. some of the most conspicuous strategies of charr involve migrations to salt water (johnson 1980; dempson & kristofferson 1987; gross 1987; mcdowall 1988; dodson 1997). anadromous arctic charr are found predominantly in the northern part of the distribution area of this species. usually they occur sympatrically with resident charr from the same gene pool (johnson 1980; nordeng 1983; hindar et al. 1986; reist 1989). the two forms can interbreed during autumn, and each can give rise to the other (nordeng 1983; jonsson & jonsson 1993). thorpe et al. (1998) presented a salmonid life- history model, based on proximate considerations of individual growth rate and energetic status (lipid content) of hatchery atlantic salmon (salmo_salar l.). their model involves identiﬁcation of the times at which developmental conversions (smolting and mat- uration) are initiated or inhibited and the connection between physiological states and the thresholds for such conversions. it provides a framework for relating ecological and physiological mechanisms leading to the developmental changes of smolt metamorphosis 305 rikardsen et al. in contrast and maturation. stocks of wild salmon and other salmonid species may be expected to show different timing and thresholds for the conversions in the life- history model compared with hatchery ﬁsh. further- more, to most atlantic salmon, some migrant charr species and brown_trout (salmo_trutta l.), may return from the sea to fresh water after only a few weeks in summer without maturing (klemetsen et al. 2003). these return migrations may take place in one to four successive years before the ﬁsh attain sexual maturity (johnson 1980; jonsson & jonsson 1993). in contrast, the atlantic salmon usually do not return from sea before they mature (klemetsen et al. 2003). rikardsen & elliott (2000) studied growth rate and lipid status of arctic charr, in relation to their later life- history decision to either migrate or not. other studies have also focused on some of these factors on hatchery (adams & huntingford 1997) or wild arctic charr (e.g., nordeng 1983; forseth et al. 1994; kristoffersen et al. 1994; rikardsen & johansen 2003), or on other wild anadromous species (forseth et al. 1999; morita & morita 2002; yamamoto & morita 2002). the present paper examines the applicability of the thorpe model to ﬁt the general life history of wild arctic charr based on a qualitative assessment of available information related to growth and lipid dynamics of arctic charr. results from the general model are discussed in context of modiﬁcations required to account for added complexities in the life history of arctic charr. the proximate basis for the original salmon model thorpe et al. (1998) derived the life-history model for atlantic salmon based on physiological comparisons of the lipid content and size of ﬁsh (and their changes of state), with genetic determined maturation (m1 and m2) and emigration (r) threshold values for these parameters at three critical seasons (fig. 1). individual juveniles whose state and performance exceeded their respective genetic emigration threshold (r; fig. 1b) shortly after midsummer would maintain appetite and growth into the autumn; those that did not reach these thresholds would lose appetite and slow their growth in late summer resulting in two divergent life-history paths. on both paths, in mid-autumn (at the normal spawning season) and performance exceeded new genetically determined maturation threshold (m1; fig. 1a) would begin to re-invest energy in reproductive tissue. those that did not reach these threshold levels would remain imma- ture, the more rapidly growing group now developing towards smolting (thorpe 1994a). during the winter months all individuals would use some stored energy for survival, and the maturing individuals would individuals whose state 306 convert some of this energy store to gonadal tissue. towards spring a third physiological assessment would be made, when a proportion of those maturing individuals would have fallen below the second required maturation threshold level (m2; not shown in fig. 1a) to maintain gonad growth and would arrest it again. this would result in three discernible life-history paths: smolting ﬁsh becoming migrants, maturing residents and nonmaturing residents. exam- ples of different trajectories are given in fig. 1. for a detailed description of the proximate basis and calcu- lation of the original model, see thorpe et al. (1998). the arctic charr life-history model maturation versus smolting rikardsen & elliott (2000) studied the relationships between individual growth rate, lipid and protein content, and anadromy and residency of individually tagged arctic charr at storvatn and rungavatn in north norway. the population in rungavatn had a lower rate of growth of individual ﬁsh and only one-third the degree of anadromy (21%) relative to the population in storvatn (56%). within the two populations, juvenile growth pattern and lipid allocation signiﬁcantly inﬂu- enced whether and when individual charr would migrate to sea or mature and remain resident. the thorpe et al. (1998) model is consistent with the different life-history patterns within and between these two arctic charr populations. first, in both lakes, the parr with the highest overall growth rate and size during late summer and autumn migrated the follow- ing spring (fig. 2), while those with the lowest growth rate at that time remained in the lake. this corresponds to the emigration element of the original thorpe model (fig. 1b). secondly, the charr population with the highest lipid levels in summer and autumn (runga- vatn), had the earliest maturing ﬁsh and lowest degree of migration. the model predicts that a high lipid level in autumn permits completion of maturation the following year (fig. 1a). finally, the rate of change in lipid from october to may was much higher in storvatn (91% reduction) than in rungavatn (64% reduction). note that the lipid content of storvatn charr sampled in may was 0.2 ± 0.21 95% cl (n ¼ 8) (a. h. rikardsen, unpublished data). values for the other months are given in rikardsen & elliott (2000). according to the model, a higher proportion of the storvatn charr should then emigrate rather than mature, compared with the charr in rungavatn. this is what happened. maturation in storvatn usually took place when the charr were 5–7 years old in contrast to the charr in rungavatn that usually matured at 3–5 years of age. the higher rate of change of lipid during winter and spring of parr that emigrated was modelling the life history of charr fig. 1. schematic illustration of how the combinations of state and rate of change of state are used when the developmental switch points (g1, g2 and e) occur. (a) during the assessment window in november, the actual level and rate of change of lipid is monitored by the ﬁsh, compared with a reference trajectory (r), and used to create a predicted trajectory of lipid reserves. the ﬁgure shows three examples, all of which involve a decrease in lipid during the winter. fish a has a lipid level in november exceeding the threshold level m1 and a projected trajectory that maintains lipid levels in april above m1. hence, it is on a maturing pathway (g1 ¼ 1). although ﬁsh b has a lipid level in november exceeding m1, its projected lipid trajectory takes the lipid level below m1 in april and hence it switches off maturation (g1 ¼ 0). the lipid level of ﬁsh c lies below m1 in november and is projected to lie below m1 in april; hence it too switches off maturation. at the second assessment window in april, if energy use has been greater than expected over winter and levels have fallen below m2 (not shown in ﬁgure), the ﬁsh can arrest further maturation by reset to g2 ¼ 0. (b) at the time of the assessment window in late summer, the assumed trajectories of resident and emigrating ﬁsh are compared with a reference trajectory (r). in this assessment window, the ﬁsh compares its energetic status (for which size is used here as a proxy) with a genetically determined emigration threshold (r). (the ﬁgures are redrawn and changed from thorpe et al. (1998) with permission). growth patterns that are critical for the decisions about smolting and maturation. similar effects of growth on maturation and smolting have been found in studies of riverine white spotted charr (salvelinus_leucomaenis) in japan (morita & morita 2002; yamamoto & morita 2002) and on brook charr (salvelinus_fontinalis) in canada (the´riault & dodson, 2003). morita & morita (2002) showed that within a resident population of white spotted charr, slow growing ﬁsh reach sexual maturity not only at an older age, but also at a smaller size than fast-growing ﬁsh. yamamoto & morita (2002) found that in several anadromous populations of the same species mean smolt length was positively correlated with mean speciﬁc growth rate in their ﬁrst year of life, whereas mean smolt age was negatively correlated with speciﬁc growth rate. the´riault & dodson (2003) showed that the fastest growing brook charr either migrated to sea or became resident in the river, while slower growing individuals migrated later in life and at a bigger size. however, these studies did not look at within-season growth or rate of change of lipid. adams & huntingford (1997) studied the relation- ships between growth, lipid reserves and maturation in hatchery-reared arctic charr, and concluded that the principles of the model relating energy acquisition and sexual maturation were applicable to this species. they also suggested a wide interpopulation variation in the threshold of maturation responses of individual charr to the accumulation of energy reserves, as in salmon (thorpe 1994b). by assuming similar timing of the thresholds and developmental conversions as in salmon, the different 307 fig. 2. the general growth pattern of charr that became resident or migrated as 4+ or 5+ smolts in two small lakes in northern norway (summarised after results described in rikardsen & elliott 2000). reﬂected in a greater weight loss during winter and spring than in the nonmigrants (fig. 2). nordeng (1983), thorpe (1987), and jonsson & jonsson (1993) report that fast (and slow) growth resulted in early maturation and residency, while ﬁsh with a medium growth rate smolted. this appears to contradict rikardsen and elliott’s data. however, in these particular studies, nordeng, thorpe, and jonsson and jonsson measured growth rate over the whole season as their time base, and their data could not discriminate between the differences in within-season rikardsen et al. charr life-history trajectories and their proximate bases (fig. 1) can be represented diagrammatically (fig. 3) as in the thorpe model. based on the thorpe model, the adjusted arctic charr model is ﬁtted to the special life history of anadromous charr: the return migrations after only a few weeks at sea in summer; overwinter- ing in freshwater; and the fact that ﬁrst spawning usually does not take place before two or more sea migrations. this charr model is consistent with variation in the timing of the developmental conver- sions, and predicts wide variation in life-history patterns and combinations for arctic charr that either mature as parr in freshwater (resident) or smolt and delay maturation (anadromous). repeat spawning and change of life-history tactics among atlantic salmon, parr that mature and survive spawning may or may not re-mature in the coming autumn (myers et al. 1986; berglund et al. 1992). if they do not mature again on that next maturity cycle they may smolt and emigrate. a similar strategy may be used by both female and male charr in rungavatn (rikardsen & elliott 2000). judged by the gonadoso- matic index, 20% of the charr smolts of both sexes in this lake appeared to be maturing. this has not been reported previously for arctic charr populations. in other charr and salmonid populations maturation appears to inhibit smolting (thorpe 1987, 1994b; dellefors & faremo 1988; hansen et al. 1989; jons- son & jonsson 1993; staurnes et al. 1994; rikardsen et al. 1997). these putatively maturing smolts had arrested gonadal development at a late stage in the winter, and that while the gonads were relatively large, these may not have been growing actively at the time of spring migration. such ﬁsh would be functionally immature. is possible that it however, hammar et al. (1989), nordeng et al. (1989) and radtke et al. (1996) noted that mature resident charr may occasionally transform and adopt anadromous behaviour and that anadromous charr may transform and adopt resident behaviour on subsequent gonadal cycles. it is most likely that these shifts in life- history tactics also are associated with proximate considerations of individual growth rate and energetic status. anadromous atlantic salmon, including parr and adult life stages, may spawn repeatedly in subsequent years, while for charr this is almost the rule (saunders & schom 1985; fleming 1996; klemetsen et al. 2003), although exceptions can occur particularly in extreme northern environments where charr may require 3 or 4 years to recover before spawning a second time (dutil 1986). for simplicity, thorpe et al. (1998) did not include repeat spawning explicitly in their model. however, as such life-history categories are simply 308 extensions of one or more maturity cycles that can be added after the spawning of any existing life-history cohort, the model is consistent with these patterns. as with ﬁrst spawning, the occurrence of repeat spawning in charr is predicted according to lipid status immedi- ately after the previous spawning. for example, jørgensen et al. (1997) found that arctic charr females lost about 80% of their body lipid during spawning and overwintering in fresh water, while the lipid depletion in the males amounted to 50–55% in the same period. they suggested that the combination of spawning and overwintering in fresh water impose a greater load for females than males, and may prevent the females (and possible also some males) from spawning in successive years, as observed in some populations (dutil 1986; rikardsen 1994). both the repeat spawning pattern and the possible delay of spawning in successive years could easily be incorporated into the diagrammatic model summarized in fig. 3 by extension of the different life-history transactions. return migration the model does not account for the special life-history characteristic shown by several charr and trout species, of return migrations of immature ﬁsh to over-winter in fresh water. høga˚sen (1998) speculated that this could be related, in part, to desmolting and interactions with water temperature and photoperiod as some studies have shown that seawater tolerance was lower in autumn and winter than in summer (finstad et al. 1989). however, nilssen et al. (1997) found that wild arctic charr were still fully physiologically adapted to sea water after their return to fresh water. furthermore, an unpublished pilot study has shown that arctic charr kept in salt water under natural light conditions and sea water temperatures until december, osmoregulated normally (e. jørgensen, norwegian college of fishery science, personal communication). in contrast, del- abbio et al. the avoidance of potentially low lethal winter temperatures was the primary factor as to why charr returned to fresh water rather than their decreased ability to tolerate salinity. rikardsen et al. (2000) suggested that the almost total cessation of growth of immature arctic charr observed after an average 45 days at sea might cause their return to freshwater. they suggested that the immediate rapid sea growth of these ﬁsh seemed to be mostly a recovery growth in the ﬁrst 2–3 weeks of their sea residency, compensating for the depletion of energy reserves during the winter months in fresh water. by migrating to the safer freshwater habitat when growth rate in the sea has ceased, anadromous charr beneﬁt by increasing their survival and thereby their total ﬁtness compared with the alternative of staying longer in the sea when the potential for a high growth rate is reduced (1990) stated that fig. 3. a schematic representation of the life history of anadromous arctic charr based on the model of thorpe et al. (1998). the timing of the thresholds and the possible life-history routes determined by the responses to those thresholds are shown for charr that mature in fresh water as parr (r2)5), that mature after two or more sea migrations (aa4, aaa5 etc.) and for charr that smolt (s3)5). subscripts indicate (rx) and the age at maturing for parr maturing anadromous charr (ax) and num- ber of years spent in fresh water prior to smolting (sx). the maturation switches m1 and m2 occur in november and april, respectively, and the emigration switch e in august. the age of the ﬁsh (2+ to 6+) at the different switches is indicated on the upper line. (rikardsen et al. 2003). whatever the reason, the proximate inducement for immature individuals to leave the sea is still largely unknown, and future studies are needed to address this area. limitations and future challenges it the model proposed for arctic charr is based largely on genetic threshold values and as such cannot be tested directly in the absence of population-speciﬁc criteria. however, based on sound knowledge of population-speciﬁc behavioural, physiological den- sity-dependent mechanisms underlying the triggering of key life events, is realistic to suppose that quantitative predictions of annual variation in smolt output and mature parr densities for different salmonid populations based on egg deposition rates and tem- perature proﬁles can be achieved (e.g., see discussion by metcalfe 1998). furthermore, in this paper and in the thorpe model, we have used individual growth rate and lipid status in relation to subsequent life- history decisions whether remain resident. numerous factors have been linked with smoltiﬁcation and maturation in salmonids (e.g. see review by meerburg 1986). it is likely that hormones associated with these factors or other traits correlated to feeding and energy storage may act as direct triggers for switches in development pathways. for example, the regulatory protein leptin has recently been showed to be produced in adipose tissue of atlantic salmon and also to have a function in the fat metabolism of the ﬁsh (vegusdal et al. 2003). this protein, together with other hormones, may play an important role in telling the ﬁsh its energetic status and thus be important in the triggering of key life-history events. it may also have an unknown function in to migrate or modelling the life history of charr triggering the return to fresh water when, for example, a cessation of growth is experienced in salt water. future studies that address such proximate factors are needed, and would be important for a better under- standing and prediction of life-history decisions within salmonid species and populations. conclusions the charr model illustrates how conditional choices at various points of time may launch individuals along different developmental pathways. the high variation of life-history strategies of arctic charr, partly illus- trated in fig. 3, may be explained by physiological comparisons of the ﬁsh by their lipid content and size (and their change of state) with possible genetic threshold values. this suggests that many of the proximate mechanisms that inﬂuence smolting and maturation in charr and salmon could be similar, and that the version of the model illustrated for arctic charr may be applied to charr populations in general, although the proximate reason for charr to leave the sea after only a few weeks is still unknown. however, this model can potentially be applied to any situation involving conditional decisions at speciﬁc switch points triggered by any determining factor and not necessarily by some common biological mechanism. as such, is more analogy rather than homology and can assist in providing direction as to where researchers could formulate testable hypothesis concerning the underlying physiological mechanisms. the model resumen 1. examinamos un modelo basado en consideraciones pro´ximas sobre la biologı´a de salmo_salar para su aplicabilidad a la 309 rikardsen et al. biologı´a de salvelinus_alpinus, basado en evaluaciones cuali- tativas de informacio´ n relacionadas con la dina´mica del crecimiento y de lı´pidos en s. alpinus. discutimos el modelo original de s. salar en el contexto de las modiﬁcaciones necesarias para incluir la complejidad an˜adida de la biologı´a de s. alpinus con relacio´n a la anadromı´a versus residencia. 2. un estudio hecho en el norte de noruega mostro´ que, en comparacio´ n a los individuos residentes de s. alpinus, los individuos que emigran desde los lagos hasta el mar mantienen una alta tasa de crecimiento en el lago durante el ﬁnal del verano e inicio de oton˜o. niveles relativamente bajos de lı´pidos en oton˜o combinados con una alta de intercambio de lı´pidos durante el invierno parecieron asociado a una maduracio´ n pospuesta en los individuos ana´dromos. los individuos que permanecen residentes en el lago reducen el crecimiento en oton˜o. su alto nivel de lı´pidos en oton˜o combinado con una menor tasa de intercambio de lı´pidos parecio´ asociada a la maduracio´n, el verano siguiente, sin emigracio´ n desde aguas dulces. 3. los resultados de este y otros estudios relacionados muestran similitud con el modelo derivado de la dina´mica de lı´pidos y de crecimiento en s. salar. el modelo para s. alpinus ilustra posibles explicaciones pro´ximas para la alta variacio´ n en las estrategias biolo´ gicas de s. alpinus. sin embargo, no explica la migraciones de vuelta a aguas dulces varias semanas despue´s de entrar en el mar, caracterı´sticas de juveniles de s. alpinus. los estı´mulos ﬁsiolo´gicos pro´ximos que expliquen estos movimientos en individuos inmaduros no esta´n claros. acknowledgements we thank two anonymous referees for helpful comments on the manuscript. this work was possible due to ﬁnancial support from the norwegian research council and the norwegian institute for nature research. references adams, c.e. & huntingford, f.a. 1997. growth, maturation and reproductive investment in arctic charr. journal of fish biology 51: 750–759. berglund, i., schmitz, m. & lundquist, h. 1992. seawater adaptability in baltic salmon (salmo_salar): a bimodal smoltiﬁcation pattern in previously mature males. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 49: 1097–1106. delabbio, j.l., sreedharan, a. & glebe, b.d. 1990. important considerations in the mariculture of arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus l.). in: saunders, r.l.ed. proceedings of canada– norway ﬁnﬁsh aquaculture workshop, 11–14 september 1989. canadian technical report of fisheries and aquatic sciences no. 1761: pp. 119–124. dellefors, c. & faremo, u. 1988. early sexual maturation in males of wild sea_trout, salmo_trutta l., inhibits smoltiﬁca- tion. journal of fish biology 33: 741–749. dempson, j.b. & kristofferson, a.h. 1987. spatial and temporal aspects of the ocean migration of anadromous arctic char. in: dadswell, m.j., klauda, r.j., mofﬁtt, c.m., saunders, r.l., rulifson, r.a. & cooper, j.e., eds. common strategies of anadromous and catadromous ﬁshes, american fisheries society symposium 1. bethesda, md: american fisheries society, pp. 340–357. 310 dodson, j.j. 1997. fish migration: an evolutionary perspective. in godin, j.-g.j., ed. behavioural ecology of teleost ﬁshes. oxford: oxford university press, pp. 10–36. dutil, j.d. 1986. energetic constraints and spawning interval in anadromous arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus). copeia 1986: 945–955. finstad, b. nilssen, k.j. & arnesen, a.m. 1989. seasonal changes in sea water tolerance of arctic charr (salvelinus_alpinus). journal of comparative physiology 159: 371– 378. fleming, i.a. 1996. reproductive strategies of atlantic salmon: ecology and evolution. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 6: 379–416. forseth, t., ugledal, o. & jonsson, b. 1994. the energy budget, niche shift, reproduction and growth in a population of arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus. journal of animal ecology 63: 116–126. forseth, t., næsje, t.f., jonsson, b. & ha˚rsaker, k. 1999. juvenile migration in brown_trout: a consequence of energetic state. journal of animal ecology 68: 783–793. gross, m.r. 1987. evolution of diadromy in ﬁshes. in: dadswell, m.j., klauda, r.j., mofﬁtt, c.m., saunders, r.l., rulifson, r.a. & cooper, j.e., eds. common strategies of anadromous and catadromous ﬁshes, american fisheries society symposiom 1. bethesda, md: american fisheries society symposium 1, 14–25. høga˚sen, h. r. 1998. physiological changes associated with the diadromous migration of salmonids. canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences no. 127. ottawa: nrc research press, 128 pp. hammar, j., porter, r., skjøld, e. & verspoor, e. 1989. mixed or reversed anadromy life-history strategies of arctic charr in southern labrador. physiology and ecology japan, 1 (special volume). 169 pp. hansen, l.p., jonsson, b., morgan, r.i.g. & thorpe, j.e. 1989. inﬂuence of parr maturity on emigration of smolting atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 46: 410–415. hindar, k., ryman, n & sta˚hl, g. 1986. genetic differentiation among local populations and morphotypes of arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus. biological journal of the linnean society 27: 269–285. jørgensen, e.h., johansen, s.j.s. & jobling, m. 1997. seasonal patterns of growth, lipid deposition and lipid depletion in anadromous arctic charr. journal of fish biology 51: 312–326. johnson, l. 1980. the arctic charr, salvelinus_alpinus. in: the genus balon, e.k., ed. charrs: salmonid ﬁshes of salvelinus. the hague: dr w. junk, pp. 15–98. jonsson, b. & jonsson, n. 1993. partial migration: niche shift versus sexual maturation in ﬁshes. reviews in fish biology and fisheries 3: 348–365. klemetsen, a., amundsen, p.-a., dempson, j.b., jonsson, b., jonsson, n., o’connell, m.f. & mortensen, e. 2003. atlantic salmon salmo_salar l., brown_trout salmo_trutta l. and arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus (l.): a review of aspects of their life histories. ecology of freshwater fish 12: 1–59. kristoffersen, k., halvorsen, m. & jørgensen, l. 1994. inﬂuence of parr growth, lake morphology, and freshwater parasites on the degree of anadromy in different populations of arctic char (salvelinus_alpinus) in northern norway. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 51: 1220–1246. mcdowall, r.m. 1988. diadromy in ﬁshes. london: croom helm. meerburg, d. k. 1986. salmonid age at maturity. canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences no. 89. ottawa: nrc research press. 118 pp. metcalfe, n.b. 1998. the interaction between behavior and physiology in determining life history patterns in atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic science 55 (suppl. 1): 93–103. morita, k. & morita, s.h. 2002. rule of age and size at maturity: individual variation in the maturation history of resident white-spotted charr. journal of fish biology 61: 1230–1238. myers, r.a., hutchings, j.a. & gibson, r.j. 1986. variation in male parr maturation within and among populations of atlantic salmon, salmo_salar. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 43: 1242–1248. nilssen, k.j., gulseth, o.a., iversen, m. & kjøl, r. 1997. summer osmoregulatory capacity of the world’s northern- most living salmonid. american journal of physiology 272: 743–749. nordeng, h. 1983. solution to the ‘‘char problem’’ based on arctic char (salvelinus_alpinus) in norway. canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 40: 1372–1387. nordeng, h., bratland, p. & skurdal, j. 1989. pattern of smolt transformation in the resident fraction of anadromous arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus: genetic and environmental inﬂuence. physiology and ecology japan 1 (special volume): 483–488. radtke, r., svenning, m., malone, d., klemetsen, a., ruzicka, j. & fey, d. 1996. migrations in an extreme northern population of arctic charr salvelinus_alpinus: insights from otolith microchemistry. marine ecology – progress series 136: 13–23. reist, j.d. 1989. genetic structuring of allopatric populations and sympatric life history types of charr, salvelinus_alpinus/ malma, in western arctic, canada. physiology and ecology japan 1 (special volume): 405–420. rikardsen, a.h. (1994). anadromous and resident charr, salvelinus_alpinus (l.), in storvannet, hammerfest. master of science paper. tromsø, norway: norwegian college of fishery science, university of tromsø. 58 pp. (in nor- wegian). rikardsen, a.h., & elliott, j.m. 2000. variations in juvenile growth, energy allocation and life-history strategies of two populations of arctic charr in north norway. journal of fish biology 56: 328–346. modelling the life history of charr rikardsen, a.h. & johansen, m. 2003. a morphometric method for estimation of total fat level in live arctic charr: a case study of its application on wild ﬁsh. journal of fish biology 62: 724–734. rikardsen, a.h., svenning, m.-a. & klemetsen, a. 1997. the relationships between anadromy, sex ratio and parr growth of arctic charr in a lake in north norway. journal of fish biology 51: 447–461. rikardsen, a.h., amundsen, p.-a., bjørn, p.a. & johansen, m. 2000. comparison of growth, diet and food consumption of sea-run and lake-dwelling arctic charr. journal of fish biology 57: 1172–1188. rikardsen, a.h., amundsen, p.-a. & bodin, p.j. 2003. growth and diet of arctic charr post-smolt after their return to freshwater. ecology of freshwater fish 12: 74–80. saunders, r.l. & schom, c.b. 1985. importance of variation in life history parameters of atlantic salmon (salmo_salar). canadian journal of fisheries and aquatic sciences 42: 615– 618. staurnes, m., sigholt, t., gulseth, o.a. & eliassen, r. 1994. effects of maturation on seawater tolerance of anadromous arctic char. transactions of the american fisheries society 123: 402–407. the´riault, v. & dodson, j.j. 2003. body size and the adoption of a migratory tactic in brook charr. journal of fish biology, 63: 1144–1159. thorpe, j.e. 1987. smolting versus residency: developmental conﬂict in salmonids. in: dadswell, m.j., klauda, r.j., mofﬁtt, c.m., saunders, r.l., rulifson, r.a. & cooper, j.e., eds. common strategies of anadromous and catadromous ﬁshes, american fisheries society symposiom 1. bethesda, md: american fisheries society symposium 1, pp. 244–252. thorpe, j.e. 1994a. an alternative view of smolting in salmonids. aquaculture 121: 105–113. thorpe, j.e. 1994b. reproductive strategies in atlantic salmon, salmo_salar l. aquaculture and fishery management 25: 77–87. thorpe, j.e., mangel, m., metcalfe, n.b. & huntingford, f.a. 1998. modelling the proximate basis of salmonid life-history variation, with application to atlantic salmon, salmo_salar l. evolutionary ecology 12: 581–599. vegusdal a, sundvold h, gjoen t, ruyter b. 2003. an in vitro method for studying the proliferation and differentiation of atlantic salmon preadipocytes. lipids 38: 289–296. yamamoto, s. & morita, k. 2002. interpopulation comparison of size and age at smolting of white-spotted charr, salvelinus_leucomaenis. ecology of freshwater fish 11: 281–284. 311  