ecology of freshwater fish 2008: 17: 38–46 printed in malaysia æ all rights reserved ó 2007 the authors journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard ecology of freshwater fish lateral migration of arapaima gigas in ﬂoodplains of the amazon castello l. lateral migration of arapaima gigas in ﬂoodplains of the amazon. ecology of freshwater fish 2008: 17: 38–46. ó 2007 the author. journal compilation ó 2007 blackwell munksgaard l. castello mamiraua´ sustainable development institute, tefe´, amazonas, cep 69.470.000, brazil abstract – this study deduced in detail the lateral migration –those between river channels and ﬂoodplain habitats – of the pirarucu (arapaima gigas), a giant, obligate air-breathing species of the amazon basin. over a thousand samples of the pirarucu were taken through counts of the individuals performed at the moment of aerial breathing; these samples were taken in eight habitats of a ﬂoodplain near the amazon river every week throughout an entire ﬂood cycle. the lateral migration of the pirarucu accompanied water level ﬂuctuations closely. as water levels rose, the pirarucu migrated to increasingly higher habitats in ﬂooded forests and remained there during high water levels. as water levels declined, the pirarucu migrated ﬁrst back to lower habitats of ﬂooded forests, then to communicating channels, and, eventually, to the lakes, where they remained during low water levels. these results allow for a conceptual model of lateral migration of ﬂoodplain ﬁshes. key words: brazil; ﬂood-pulse; habitat and temporal heterogeneity; va´rzea l. castello, forestry drive, department of forest biology, college of environmental science and forestry, state university of new york, syracuse, 13210, new york, usa; e-mail: lcastell@syr.edu accepted for publication 9 may, 2007 remains uncontested. the subject has been addressed only by a few detailed studies (winemiller 1990; fernandez 1997). most studies have focussed on seasonal and temporal variations of ﬂoodplain ﬁsh assemblages (lowe-mcconnell 1964; mago-leccia 1970; rodriguez & lewis 1997; saint-paul et al. 2000; silvano et al. 2000; petry et al. 2003; galacatos et al. 2004). and communities 38 doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0633.2007.00255.x an introduction resources in fish migration optimises the use of temporally and spatially heterogeneous environments by investing energy in movements that bring larger energy returns (hall 1972). moreover, it ensures the survival of ﬁsh populations, and enhances the yields of ﬁsheries and the structure and function of entire ecosystems (harden jones 1968; welcomme 1979). yet, the spatial and temporal scales of ﬁsh migration in ﬂoodplains are poorly understood (junk et al. 1989; winemiller & jepsen 1998). the subject deserves attention because ﬂoodplains are among the most threatened ecosystems (tockner & stanford 2002), and several ﬂoodplain ﬁshes are threatened with extinction (allan et al. 2005). floodplain ﬁshes migrate in two main ways: longi- tudinally, along the main river channel, and laterally, between the main river channel and the ﬂoodplain (lowe-mcconnell 1987). the understanding of the latter, the ‘lateral migration’, is so limited that a general scheme proposed in 1971 (lagler et al. 1971) and slightly modiﬁed in 1987 (lowe-mcconnell 1987) levels into ‘aquatic’; the lateral migration of ﬂoodplain ﬁshes follows closely the dynamic ‘pulsing’ of water levels (junk et al. 1989). the ‘ﬂood-pulse’ creates a moving littoral zone that advances into and over ‘terrestrial’ habitats rise, gradually transforming when water ‘terrestrial’ habitat the process is reversed when water levels decline (junk et al. 1989). in river-ﬂoodplain systems, many ﬁsh species spawn during rising water levels, as inputs of nutrients and suspended solids promote maximum availability and production rates of aquatic vegetation (bayley 1989). young-of-the-year and predators migrate with the moving littoral, colonizing the ﬂoodplains in a timely fashion (bayley 1988). the ﬂooded forest generates low environment with relatively predation pressure upon ﬁshes, as the great increase in ﬂooded area lowers animal densities (lowe-mcconn- ell 1987). food is generally abundant, and many ﬁshes feed on the abundant detritus available in the newly ﬂooded areas and on pollen, fruits, seeds, and some insects that drop into the water from the canopy forest (goulding 1980). during high water levels, decom- position processes tend to increase relative to produc- tion, generally resulting in decreased dissolved oxygen levels (junk et al. 1989). many ﬁshes possess adaptations to live in deoxygenated areas (junk et al. 1983). during low water levels, only a few of the formerly ﬂooded habitats contain water. of those, the lakes and connecting channels tend to have high temperatures and low oxygen levels (junk et al. 1983); the main river channels are exceptional in maintaining more moderate temperature and oxygen during low water levels. during declining water levels, most ﬁsh are forced to migrate out of the ﬂoodplains and into main river channels in search of conditions in which they can survive (welcomme 1979). only ﬁshes with adaptations to deoxygenated environments migrate to the lakes and connecting channels, and the others go to the river channels (lowe-mcconnell 1987). during low water levels, many ﬁshes show marked decreases in feeding activity (junk 1985). despite this understanding, however, most studies on lateral migration have not analysed how ﬁshes utilise the spatial heterogeneity of relatively pristine ﬂoodplains over an entire ﬂooding cycle (winemiller 1990, being an exception). this is critical because in pristine ﬂoodplains not only do water levels change daily, and sometimes dramatically, but the ‘ﬂood pulse produces and maintains a highly diverse and dynamic habitat structure’ (junk et al. 1989). here, the lateral migration of the pirarucu (arapaima gigas shinz) in a pristine ﬂoodplain of the amazon basin was studied in detail. the following research questions were asked: (1) what are the main drivers of the migration of the pirarucu in ﬂoodplains? (2) what habitats are used the most? (3) to what extent and in what ways is the diversity of habitat structure of ﬂoodplains used by the pirarucu? the pirarucu is an important ﬁsh of the amazon and essequibo basins. by being piscivores (sa´nchez 1969) and attaining sizes of up to 3 m in length and 200 kg in weight (queiroz 2000), they probably play a key role in regulating energy and nutrient ﬂows of aquatic ecosystems. as they possess tasty meat and an obligatory air-breathing system, they move to the surface to breath every 5 to 15 min, and they can be harpooned easily to develop important ﬁsheries (ver- ı´ssimo 1895; martinelli & petrere jr. 1999). pirarucu ﬁsheries are so important that the few data available indicate they are overﬁshed in most of the amazon (isaac et al. 1998; queiroz & sardinha 1999), have lateral migration of arapaima gigas been extirpated in some regions (goulding et al. 1996), and consequently are even vulnerable to extinction (world conservation monitoring centre 1996). despite this situation, virtually no information exists on the migration patterns of the pirarucu, making it difﬁcult to assess and manage the popula- tions. the pirarucu are characterised as being ‘seden- tary’, meaning they do not conduct long migrations (isaac et al. 1993). only a very minimal outline of the lateral migration of the pirarucu was speculated from their annual cycle of events in an unpublished study (queiroz 2000). queiroz (2000) speculated that the pirarucu inhabit the lakes during the dry season, where they feed and the adults develop gonads, court, build nests, and mate. during rising water levels, the water previously concentrated in the lakes and some chan- nels (including the river itself) spreads to much greater areas. the pirarucu appears to migrate to the ﬂooded forests where males care for the offspring. during the initial and rapid declining of water levels, parental care ceases and the pirarucu migrate back to the river, connecting channels, or lakes where they are ﬁshed. the cycle then repeats itself. little is known about the lateral migration of the pirarucu, or of other ﬁshes, because of the practical difﬁculties of obtaining statistically reliable data using conventional method- ologies, such as gillnets or sonar for example. during high water levels, the forested habitats of ﬂoodplains are densely vegetated, and ﬁsh population densities are low, especially when they are overexploited as the pirarucu (queiroz & sardinha 1999). materials and methods the this study deduced the lateral migration of pirarucu by detecting their per-effort presence period- ically in all habitats of a river ﬂoodplain system throughout an entire ﬂood cycle. for this, the presence of the pirarucu was determined by counts, performed by two ﬁshers, of the individuals at the moment of obligate aerial breathing. water levels, current velo- city, and transparency were measured simultaneously. sampling occurred between 29 march 1999 and 21 may 2000, yielding a total of 1035 samples of pirarucu. study area and physical variables sampled the mamiraua´ sustainable development reserve (state of amazonas, brazil) is at the conﬂuence of the solimo˜es and japura´ rivers (approximately 30s and 650w; fig. 1). the reserve is formed by pristine va´rzea, a type of ﬂoodplain that ﬂanks the sediment- rich white water rivers of the amazon; it is a complex mosaic of seasonally inundated rain forests, lakes, and 39 castello fig. 1. the study area and the locations of the sampled transects. this satellite image was taken a few months before the start of this study, in 1999, during the dry season. the study area represents a typical pristine section of va´rzea ﬂoodplain. the large (light-blue) channel is the japura´ river (rio) with its white waters. the smaller (dark blue) channels and water bodies are the parana´, cano, ressaca, and lago habitats (see table 1 for habitat deﬁnitions and fig. 2 for schematic descriptions); most of them containing ‘black waters’ at the time the image was taken because of carbon-rich humic substances. the land between these channels and water bodies are the chavascal (light green), and restinga baixa, and rest- inga alta forest habitats (both are dark gre- en). in many places, ﬂoating meadows (pink) abound during both the ﬂood and dry seasons. the image comprises an area of about 450 km2 of va´rzea ﬂoodplain; in brazil, this ecosystem spans over an area of 107,000 km2. winding channels (irion et al. 1997). the study area is of the holocenic type (ayres 1995), being completely ﬂooded annually. seasonal water temperatures vary between 27 and 31 °c (sociedade civil mamiraua 1996). a total of eight habitats of the va´rzea were sampled (table 1). this stratiﬁcation of habitats comprises all major types and is consistent with the literature and table 1. sampled habitats of the va´rzea ﬂoodplain and their descriptions. habitat type description entirely or mainly aquatic the main river channel. the rio is wide (up to 3 km), deep (up to 50 m) and swift ﬂowing (junk, 1984); the japura´ river was sampled. channels transporting river waters and crossing sections of va´rzea. both ends connect to the rio (junk, 1984; crampton, 1998). lakes of various sizes and shapes (junk, 1984). lagos hold water throughout the ﬂood cycle. a shallow type of lago with a large and open mouth. most ressacas dry up during the dry season (local classiﬁcation). channels connecting lagos to any other water body. canos may dry up during dry sason, making lagos physically isolated (crampton, 1998). low swampy woodland. usually, chavascal forests are located behind levees (ayres, 1995). silt-heightened riverbanks and bars on which grows tall forest (ayres, 1995). like the restinga baixa, but riverbanks and bars are higher and the forests are taller, older, and more diverse (ayres, 1995). rio parana´ lago ressaca cano mainly terrestrial chavascal restinga baixa restinga alta 40 local knowledge. at each habitat, three transects 1 kæm in length were established. the speciﬁc locations of the transects (fig. 1) depended on their representa- tiveness of major habitat types, similarity to the characteristics described by the literature and local knowledge, and the possibility of sampling by canoe (in some places that would be impossible). also, they had to be close enough to each other and to the ﬁeld station to allow weekly visits to every site. the speciﬁc locations of the transects depended, also, on the existing variation within the rio and chavascal habitat types. in the rio habitat, all transects were established near and parallel to the shore because, according to the ﬁshers, the pirarucu is never found in the middle of the rio where depth and water current velocity tend to be much greater. two of the rio transects were established in relatively fast-ﬂowing areas, and one (indicated in fig. 1) near a slow- ﬂowing area where a sandy beach is exposed during low water levels. as the water level declined, the beach emerged and the rio became narrower, so that the location of this transect moved towards the middle of the rio, but it always remained near and parallel to the shore, roughly in the same position. as water levels rose, the location of this transect moved back towards its original position. for each transect, we measured water current velocity and transparency. current velocity was measured using a ﬂoating piece of wood attached to a line of known length. the line was attached to the canoe used for sampling work, which was attached to objects ﬁxed on land (e.g., trees, branches). the wooden piece was put in the water, and the time taken for the line to stretch was measured. care was taken to avoid potential bias in the measurements that could be created by the canoe. this methodology measures surface ﬂow accurately (w. g. r. crampton, univer- sity of central florida, orlando, usa, personal communication). transparency was measured using a secchi disk. on the day in which the ﬂood cycle reached its maximum during the study period, we took 10 measurements of the depth of all transects using a sounding line. we measured water levels daily at the ﬁeld station (fig. 1), and used the data to calculate the mean depth of each transect we ran. sampling the pirarucu to sample the pirarucu, two local ﬁshers used a modiﬁed version of the counting method described by castello (2004). castello (2004) demonstrated that experienced ﬁshers can count the number of pirarucu accurately, by comparing counts made by the ﬁshers (of pirarucu longer than 1 m) with independent estimates of abundance (calculated using total catches and mark- recapture methods). the two ﬁshers and the author lateral migration of arapaima gigas paddled silently along all transects every week in an aluminium canoe 5 m in length looking for breathing pirarucu. two exceptions were made. the ﬁrst was that during the dry season some habitats were dry; so obviously they were not sampled. the second regards the lago habitat. the cano habitat, which is the only type of habitat that connects the lago to any other water body during low water levels (table 1; fig. 2a), is shallower than the lago. so, when the cano dries up, the lago becomes disconnected from all other water bodies, making it impossible for ﬁsh to migrate in or out of the lago. this made, also, our access to some of the lago transects very difﬁcult. thus, during the period when the lago was physically isolated, the lago was sampled only in the ﬁrst week after it became isolated. in doing this, it was assumed that the abundance of pirarucu in the lago was constant throughout that period. this is a reasonable assumption because two of the lago tran- sects were in areas where ﬁshing is prohibited and protected by paid guards, and the pirarucu is too large to be predated on. the third lago transect was in a lago of large size that received little ﬁshing pressure. sampling the lago transects was resumed in the ﬁrst week when the cano transects connecting to them were ﬂooded. (a) habitats (b) water level presence of pirarucu in no sample in 1/3 of samples in 2/3 of samples in all samples -3.5 -5.5 -7.5 ) m ( h t p e -9.5d -10.7 -11.7 -13.8 -16.1 restinga alta restinga baixa chavascal cano lago ressaca parana rio apr. may jun. jul. aug. 1999 sep. oct. nov. dec. jan. feb. mar. 2000 apr. may fig. 2. (a) schematic description of the sampled habitats of the va´rzea ﬂoodplain. (b) seasonal variation of the relative abundance of the pirarucu in the sampled habitats and the pulsing water cycle. the vertical axis represents the average depth of all sampled habitats relative to the maximum level reached by the water. daily water levels measured at the ﬁeld station are indicated by the solid curve. note that the lago habitat contained water at levels higher than the ﬁeld station because it was isolated during dry season. tick marks on lago habitat samples indicate samples that were assumed to equal the sample taken in the ﬁrst week after the lago became physically isolated; see text for details. 41 castello the speed of the canoe was regulated at a nearly )1, using a geographical posi- constant speed, 0.3 mæs tion system. no transect was run under conditions of rain or wind. in the study area, rains tend to be heavy but short in time. wind speeds tend to be near zero, usually less than 1 knot; stronger winds tend to accompany the rains. at every transect ran, the ﬁshers counted the number of pirarucu they heard or observed. in this study, no size limits were applied to the counts of pirarucu. however, pirarucu smaller than 1 m are difﬁcult to hear and observe; so the majority of pirarucu counted were longer than that length. to analyse the collected data, four issues were considered. first, not all three replicate transects of a given habitat could be run in some weeks because one or two of the transects were dry; these transects were excluded from all analyses performed. second, the methodology developed here assumes that the two ﬁshers were capable of (i) detecting the presence of the individuals of pirarucu, and (ii), when more than one individual were in the area, of distinguishing among different surfacing individuals. in this regard, there is reason to believe that double- or no-counts of pirarucu are unlikely, although entirely possible. in 1999, both ﬁshers together possessed over 50 years of profes- sional and continual experience with the pirarucu. the experiments performed by castello (2004) showed that the counts of the pirarucu performed by these two ﬁshers varied 10% around the true value (compare table 1 with table 3 in castello 2004). third, in the study of castello (2004) the ﬁshers counted the pirarucu using the equivalent of quadrat-plots, which allow the estimation of absolute population densities. in the present study, the ﬁshers counted the pirarucu using line-transects in which the length of the sampled area is known (1 km) but the width is not; so absolute population densities for the entire area sampled could not be estimated. fourth, it was impossible to estimate the width of the line-transect samples, i.e., the distance reached by the senses of the ﬁshers (vision and hearing) while running the transects. this was so because of the combined inﬂuences of: (i) differences among habitats, such as vegetation cover and ﬂoating meadows; (ii) constantly changing differences within habitats, such as sunlight intensity and noise made by moving tree branches and animals (e.g., ﬁshes, frogs, birds); and (iii) the impossibility of determining the precise locations of most surfacing pirarucu in forested habitats (because of the dense vegetation). these considerations imply that the collected data set would not allow determining whether one habitat was, say 50%, more densely inhabited by the pirarucu than another. nevertheless, the data set was appropriate for deducing migration patterns of the pirarucu, if considered as an indicator of the 42 presence or absence, and if it was analysed with regard to temporal changes. for example, if at a given point in time the pirarucu were found only in the lago habitat and nowhere else, and if at a later point in time, the pirarucu were no longer found in the lago but only in the rio, then it would be that migration occurred. an reasonable to infer implicit assumption is that the effect of migration in and out of the entire study area was negligible in terms of migration between and among habitats. it is through the use of this qualitative analysis of the data set that this study deduced the lateral migration of the pirarucu. thus, the counts of pirarucu performed at each of the three transects established at each habitat type were used to determine an average index of the presence of the pirarucu for each sampled week. results the main results of this study are: (i) the pirarucu were found in all of the surveyed habitats at distinct parts of the annual cycle; (ii) preferred habitats are the lago (i.e., lakes) and chavascal, restinga baixa, and restinga alta (i.e., forest habitats); (iii) the main physical drivers of the lateral migration of the pirarucu appear to be low depth and low current velocity. lateral migration of the pirarucu the lateral migration of the pirarucu accompanied water level ﬂuctuations closely (fig. 2a,b). as water levels rose, the pirarucu migrated to increasingly higher habitats in ﬂooded forests, and as water levels declined, the pirarucu migrated ﬁrst back to lower habitats of ﬂooded forests, then to communicating channels, and eventually to the lakes. between april and june 1999, virtually all pirarucu were found in the seasonally ﬂooded forests, the habitats of chav- ascal, restinga baixa, and restinga alta (fig. 2a,b). pirarucu over 1.5 m in length were observed swim- ming in very shallow water (0.5 m). eighteen pirarucu were observed caring for the young in the ﬂooded forests, guiding the off-spring that followed them near their head. mouth-brooding was not observed. between july and august 1999, the pirarucu were found in the cano, ressaca, parana´, and lago (fig. 2a,b). between august 1999 and february 2000, when the lago remained physically isolated, most pirarucu were in the lago (fig. 2a,b). in mid-september, however, some pirarucu were observed in that transect of the rio located near a beach where current velocity tend to be slow (figs 1 and 2a,b). in mid-december, during a small ﬂood pulse, some pirarucu were found in the cano and ressaca (fig. 2a,b). after february 2000, when the lago was no longer physically isolated, the pirarucu were found ﬁrst in the chavascal and then in restinga baixa forests. serve as a conceptual model for understanding the lateral migration of other ﬂoodplain ﬁshes. lateral migration of arapaima gigas relation to physical variables lateral migration of pirarucu (kruskal-wallis, the relative abundance of the pirarucu in the habitats (measured in terms of the proportion of the transect samples in which the pirarucu were found, i.e., 0, 1 ⁄ 3, 2 ⁄ 3, and 1) was not related to any of the physical n0 = 229, variables measured n1 ⁄ 3 = 64, n2 ⁄ 3 = 28, and n1 = 13, p > 0.1). but the presence or absence of the pirarucu in any given habitat was related to current velocity and depth (table 2). the pirarucu selected generally shallow, slow ﬂowing habitats (table 2). water transparency in the samples in which the pirarucu were present during the reproductive period of the species (around 67 cm, from december to may; queiroz 2000) was signiﬁ- cantly lower than during the rest of the year (around 115 cm; mann-whitney u-test, nreproductive = 109, nnonreproductive = 212, p < 0.0001). discussion the lateral migration of the pirarucu appears to be a very cost-effective strategy for optimising the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of resources of the va´rzea. the migrations to and through the habitats of chav- ascal, restinga baixa, and restinga alta appear to have functions related to feeding and reproduction (nest building, mating, and parental care). the migrations to and through the habitats of parana´, cano, lago, ressaca, and rio appear to have functions related to survival (i.e., avoidance of unfavourable conditions), feeding, and reproduction (courting and pairing; fig. 2a,b). the habitats of the va´rzea are arranged in such a way spatially that in most instances the distances among them are very small, rarely over 1 km (the rio being an exception, fig. 1). so, the pirarucu appear to beneﬁt from, and fulﬁl the ecosystem roles of, migration with only modest investments compared with that of the longitudinal migrations of other ﬁshes. these results table 2. medians and ﬁrst and third quartiles (in parentheses) of the three physical variables measured, for all samples, and for samples in which the pirarucu were present and absent. all pirarucu variable (n=1002) present (n=321) absent (n=681) depth (m) current velocity (mæs-1) transparency (cm) 5.8 (2.13–10.75) 3.08 (1.40–5.20)* 7.92 (4.86–11.11)* 0.14 (0.05–0.41) 0.12 (0.04–0.18)* 0.15 (0.06–0.41)* 103 (47–138) 120 (56–143)** 93 (39–146)** * p < 0.0001 ** non-signiﬁcant chavascal, and restinga restinga baixa, during rising and high water levels (april–june 1999), the pirarucu were found in the ﬂooded forest habitats of alta (fig. 2a,b). the pirarucu migrated into these habitats right after they were ﬂooded. this was enabled by the air-breathing system of the pirarucu, which allows them to inhabit hypoxic environments of ﬂooded forest, and by their elongated body, which allows them to swim in very shallow water (0.5 m). there are two advantages for the pirarucu to inhabit the ﬂooded forests and, in particular, to migrate into them immediately after they are ﬂooded: feeding and parental care. the pirarucu aged about 1 year and older feed primarily on ﬁsh (sa´nchez 1969; queiroz 2000). four ﬁsh families comprise about half of all ingested food in weight; these are species of the families callichthyidae, loricariidae, pimelodidae, and heptapteridae, in order of decreasing importance (queiroz 2000). most such ﬁshes are detritivorous or omnivorous, and several species of callichthyidae and loricariidae are adapted to hypoxic conditions, tend to be nonmigratory, these ﬂoodplains throughout their life cycles (crampton 1999). with exception of the callichthyidae, the three other prey groups are reported to inhabit the ﬂooded forests during high water levels (crampton 1999). thus, they are likely to constitute constant food sources for the pirarucu. this is especially so early in the ﬂood when these prey species ﬁnd generally higher oxygen levels (winemiller & jepsen 1998). and inhabit all 18 observations of parental care occurred in the ﬂooded forests, and half of them near ﬂoating mead- ows. the ﬂooded forests offer many species of insects, ﬁsh larvae, and other small organisms (junk et al. 1989) for the offsprings of the pirarucu to eat. indeed, the young pirarucu has a very diverse diet (queiroz 2000). in addition, ﬂoating meadows constitute ‘an important nursery habitat for a great number, perhaps the great majority, of ﬁshes’ in the va´rzea (winemiller & jepsen 1998). food-rich conditions like these help explain the fast growth of the young pirarucu, which may grow to 0.5 m in total length by the end of the ﬂood, i.e., 3 months (personal observations). during low water levels (august 1999–february 2000), most of the pirarucu were observed in the lago in population densities that were obviously much greater than during the rest of the year when they were dispersed in much greater forested areas (fig. 2a,b). this is consistent with all previous reports (verı´ssimo 1895; queiroz & sardinha 1999; martinelli & petrere jr. 1999). during this time, inhabiting the lago may 43 castello provide the pirarucu with three advantages. the ﬁrst is increasing survival rates. low water levels are asso- ciated with higher ﬁsh mortality (welcomme 1979). because the lago may, and usually does, become physically isolated, inhabiting them provides safety against extreme drought, e.g., el nin˜o years. the second is maintaining adequate feeding rates. during low water levels, oxygen levels in the lago tend to be low (junk et al. 1983). while most ﬁsh species in the lago are stressed, some even die, the pirarucu do ﬁne and predate actively. the pirarucu show very small seasonal variations in fat content (junk 1985). the third is promoting reproduction. by inhabiting a habitat in high population densities, the chances of engaging in courtship and mating activities are increased. indeed, the end of the low water period (december–march) coincides with the reproductive period of the pirarucu (november–december; queiroz 2000). thus, courting activities must have occurred in the lago. also, a study in this same area showed that preferred nesting habitats are the ﬂooded banks of ressaca, lago, and parana´ (castello, in review). thus nest building must have occurred at the time of the third and fourth ﬂood pulses, december and february, respectively. at that time, the water levels ﬂooded the cano and the banks surrounding the lago, ressaca, and parana´ (fig. 2a,b), allowing the pirarucu to migrate out of the lago and into the ressaca and parana´. relation of migration to physical variables shallow depth (3 m) and low current velocity (0.12 mæs )1) are the best predictors of the presence of the pirarucu in any given habitat (table 2). the relation between the migration of the pirarucu and depth is clear. water levels varied over 13 m in the va´rzea (fig. 2a,b); but, lateral migration maintained depth at locations where the pirarucu were between 1.4 and 5.2 m (table 2). the relation between the migration of the pirarucu and current velocity is less clear, however. the difference between current velo- city of the samples in which the pirarucu were present and those in which they were absent is small (0.12 and 0.15 mæs )1, respectively; table 2). the pirarucu tend to prefer the more elevated habitats (fig. 2a,b), namely the ﬂooded forests and the lago. there may be two reasons for their preference for shallow habitats. first, full exploration of the column of water (e.g. to inspect for prey and predators) depends on the capacity of the pirarucu to swim between the bottom and the surface to breath. thus, deeper habitats may involve greater energy costs. second, ﬁsh abundance is directly correlated with shallow depth in many ecosystems. in ﬂoodplains, this is evidenced by the migration of ﬁsh to ﬂooded forests during high water levels, and to lakes and river 44 channels during low water levels (lowe-mcconnell 1987). in creeks, total ecosystem metabolism per unit of volume increases with decrease in depth, perhaps due to concentration of food resources and the smaller energy the ﬁsh expend searching for food (hall 1972). in the oceans, the association of ﬁshes with shallow depths and their high biological productivity there has been well-documented (e.g., lindeboom 2002). but no relation was found between water transpar- ency and the lateral migration of a visual predator like the pirarucu (table 2). the only relation found was seasonal: the lowest transparencies occurred during the reproductive period of the species, from december to may. low transparency may, thus, reduce predation pressure on the offspring by birds or other ﬁshes, for example, and increase reproductive success. understanding lateral migration of other ﬁshes this study lends support to a conceptual model of lateral migration of ﬂoodplain ﬁshes (fig. 2a,b). obviously, the validity of this model varies depending on the species in question as well as habitat structure and ﬂooding cycles of the region. however, this model illustrates clearly the type of intricate interplay that exists in pristine ﬂoodplains between ﬁsh migrations, dynamic water levels, and heterogeneous habitat structure. for example, the omnivorous tambaqui (colossoma macropomum cuvier) migrate laterally in the va´rzea (arau´ jo-lima & goulding 1997), following among other things the ripening order of their preferred fruits and seeds. local ﬁshers know this order and beneﬁt from it. this model implies that detailed understanding of lateral migration can only be obtained through careful consideration of the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of ﬂoodplains. note the author has just found out the studied ﬁsh is an un-described species. acknowledgements this study beneﬁted greatly from the expertise and dedication of the ﬁshermen raimundo cordeiro ‘cabecinha’ and jorge carvalho ‘tapioca’, who live in the study area. thanks go to m. petrere, j. p. castello, and t. polachek who helped develop the sampling scheme, r. busoli, x. castello, and h. bongghi who helped produce fig. 2, the advisors d. j. stewart and c. a. s. hall who improved the manuscript greatly, and m. pinedo- vasquez, s. stehman and v. luzadis who reviewed the manuscript. this study was funded by the sociedade civil mamiraua´ and the conselho nacional de pesquisa (brazil), the department for international development (england), and the wildlife conservation society and the overbrook foundation (united states). references allan, j.d., abell, r., hogan, z., revenga, c., taylor, b.t., welcomme, r.l. & winemiller, k. 2005. overﬁshing of inland waters. bioscience 55: 1041–1051. arau´ jo-lima, c. & goulding, m. 1997. so fruitful a ﬁsh: tambaqui, aquaculture and conservation in the amazon. new york: columbia university press. 191 pp. ayres, j.m. 1995. as matas de va´rzea do mamiraua´. tefe (brasil): conselho nacional de desenvolvimento cientı´ﬁco e tecnolo´ gico, sociedade civil mamiraua´. 123 pp. bayley, p.b. 1988. factors affecting growth rates of young tropical ﬂoodplain ﬁshes: seasonality and density-depend- ence. environmental biology of fishes 21: 127–142; doi: 10.1007/bf00004848. bayley, p.b. 1989. aquatic environments in the amazon basin, with an analysis of carbon sources, ﬁsh production, and yield. in: dodge, d.p., ed. proceedings of the international large river symposium. ottawa (canada): canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences 106: 399–408. castello, l. 2004. a method to count pirarucu: ﬁshers, assessment and management. north american journal of fisheries management 24: 379–389. castello, l. in review. nests of pirarucu arapaima gigas in ﬂoodplains of the amazon: habitat and relation to spawner abundance. journal of fish biology. crampton, w.g.r. 1998. electric signal design and habitat preferences in a species rich assemblage of gymnotiform ﬁshes from the upper amazon basin. anais da academia brasileira de ciencias 70: 805–847. crampton, w.g.r. 1999. os peixes da reserva mamiraua´: diversidade e histo´ ria natural na planı´cie alaga´vel da amazoˆnia. in: queiroz, h.l. & crampton, w.g.r., eds estrate´gias para o manejo de recursos pesqueiros em mamiraua´, tefe´ (brasil): conselho nacional de desenvolvi- mento cientı´ﬁco e tecnolo´ gico, sociedade civil mamiraua´, pp. 10–36. fernandez, c.c. 1997. lateral migration of ﬁshes in amazon ﬂoodplains. ecology of freshwater fish 6: 36–44. galacatos, k., barriga-salazar, r. & stewart, d.j. 2004. seasonal and habitat inﬂuences on ﬁsh communities within the lower yasuni river basin of the ecuadorian amazon. environmental biology of fishes 71: 33–51. goulding, m. 1980. the ﬁsh and the forest. los angeles: university of california press. 280 pp. goulding, m., smith, n.j.h. & mahar, d.j. 1996. floods of fortune; ecology and economy along the amazon. new york: columbia university press. 193 pp. hall, c.a.s. 1972. migration and metabolism in a temperate stream ecosystem. ecology 53: 585–604. harden jones, f.r. 1968. fish migration. london: edward arnold. 325 pp. irion, g., junk, w.j. & mello, j.a.s.n. 1997. the large central amazonian river ﬂoodplains near manaus: geological, climatological, hydrological and geomorphological aspects. in: junk, w.j., ed the central amazon ﬂoodplain: ecology of a pulsing system. berlin: springer verlag, pp. 23–46. isaac, v.j., rocha, v.l.c. & mota, s. 1993. considerac¸o˜es sobre a legislac¸a˜o da ‘‘piracema’’ e outras restric¸o˜es da pesca da regia˜o do me´dio amazonas. in: furtado, l.g., eds povos das a´ guas, leita˜o, w. & melo, a.f., lateral migration of arapaima gigas realidade e perspectivas na amazoˆnia bele´m (brasil): ministe´rio de cieˆncia e tecnologia, conselho nacional de pesquisa, museu paraense emilio goeldi, pp. 188–211. isaac, v.j., rufﬁno, m.l. & mcgrath, d. 1998. in search of a new approach to ﬁsheries management in the middle amazon. in: funk, f., heifetz, j., ianelli, j., power, j., quinn, t., schweigert, j., sullivan, p. & ahang, c.i., eds. proceedings of the symposium on fishery stock assessment models for the 21st century. fairbanks (usa): sea grant college program, pp. 889–902. junk, w.j. 1985. temporary fat storage, an adaptation of some ﬁsh species to the waterlevel ﬂuctuations and related environmental changes of the amazon river. amazoniana 9: 315–352. junk, w.j., soares, m.g.m. & carvalho, f.m. 1983. distri- bution of ﬁsh species in a lake of the amazon river ﬂoodplain near manaus (lago camalea˜o), with special reference to extreme oxygen conditions. amazoniana vii: 397–431. junk, w.j., bayley, p.b. & sparks, r.e. 1989. the ﬂood pulse in riverﬂoodplain systems. in: dodge, d.p., ed concept proceedings of the international large river symposium. ottawa (canada): canadian special publication of fisheries and aquatic sciences, p. 106. lagler, k.f., kapetski, j.f. & stewart, d.j. 1971. the ﬁsheries of the kafue river flats, zambia, in relation to the kafue gorge dam. technical report 1. chilanga (zambia): central fisheries research institute. 161 pp. lindeboom, h. 2002. the coastal zone: an ecosystem under pressure. in: field, j.g., hempel, g. & summerhayes, c.p., eds. oceans 2020: science, trends, and the challenge of sustainability. washington: island press, pp. 49–84. lowe-mcconnell, r.h. 1964. the ﬁshes of the rupununi savanna district of british guiana, pt. 1. groupings of ﬁsh species and effects of the seasonal cycles on the ﬁsh. zoological journal of the linnaean society 45: 103–144. lowe-mcconnell, r.h. 1987. ecological studies in tropical ﬁsh communities. cambridge: cambridge university press. 383 pp. mago-leccia, f. 1970. estudios preliminares sobre la ecologia de los peces de los llanos de venezuela. acta biologica de venezuela 7: 71–102. martinelli, n.m.c. & petrere, jr., m. 1999. morphometric relationships and indirect determination of the length fre- quency structure of the pirarucu arapaima gigas (cuvier), in the brazilian amazonia. fisheries management and ecology 5: 233–240. petry, p., bayley, p.b. & markle, d.f. 2003. relationships between ﬁsh assemblages, macrophytes and environmental gra- dients in the amazon river ﬂoodplain. journal of fish biology 63: 547–579; doi: 10.1046/j.1095-8649.2003.00169.x. queiroz, h.l. 2000. natural history and conservation of the amazonian va´rzea: red pirarucu, arapaima gigas, at giants in muddy waters. ph.d. thesis. st. andrews (uk): university of st. andrews. 226 pp. queiroz, h.l. & sardinha, a.d. 1999. a preservac¸a˜o e o uso sustentado dos pirarucus em mamiraua´. in: queiroz, h.l. & crampton, w.g.r., eds estrate´gias para o manejo de recursos pesqueiros em mamiraua´ tefe´ (brasil): conselho nacional de desenvolvimento cientı´ﬁco e tecnolo´gico, sociedade civil mamiraua´, pp. 108–141. 45 castello rodriguez, a.m. & lewis, jr., w.m. 1997. structure of ﬁsh assemblages along environmental gradients in ﬂoodplain lakes of the orinoco river. ecological monographs 67: 109–128. saint-paul, u., zuanon, j., correa, m.a.v., garcia, m., fabre, n.n., berger, u. & junk, w.j. 2000. fish communities in central amazonian white- and blackwater ﬂoodplains. envi- ronmental biology of fishes 57: 235–250. sa´nchez, j.r. 1969. ‘‘el paiche’’ aspectos de su hitstoria natural y aprovechamiento. revista de caza y pesca (lima, peru´ ) 10: 17–61. silvano, r.a.m., amaral, b.d. & oyakawa, o.t. 2000. spatial and temporal patterns of diversity and distribution of the upper jurua´ river ﬁsh community (brazilian amazon). environmental biology of fishes 57: 25–35. sociedade civil mamiraua´. 1996. mamiraua´ management plan. tefe´ (brasil): conselho nacional de desenvolvimento cient- ı´ﬁco e tecnolo´ gico, sociedade civil mamiraua´. 96 pp. tockner, k. & stanford, j.a. 2002. riverine ﬂood plains: present state and future trends. environmental conservation 29: 308–330. verı´ssimo, j. 1895. a pesca no amazoˆnia. rio de janeiro (brasil): livraria cla´ssica alves and companhia. 130 pp. welcomme, r.l. 1979. fisheries ecology of floodplain rivers. second edition. london: longman press. 317 pp. winemiller, k.o. 1990. spatial and temporal variation in tropical ﬁsh trophic networks. ecological monographs 60: 331–367. winemiller, k.o. & jepsen, d.b. 1998. effects of seasonality and ﬁsh movement on tropical river food webs. journal of fish biology 53(suppl a): 267–296; doi: 10.1111/j.1095- 8649.1998.tb01032.x. world conservation monitoring centre. 1996. arapaima gigas. in 2004 iucn red list of threatened species. http:// www.iucnredlist.org. downloaded on 20 march 2006. 46  