ecology of freshwater fish 2017: 26: 160–164 ó 2015 john wiley & sons a/s. published by john wiley & sons ltd ecology of freshwater fish letter the land ethic and conservation of native salmonids john j. piccolo river ecology and management group, institute for environmental and life sciences, karlstad university, karlstad 651 81, sweden accepted for publication october 21, 2015 the 2015 symposium ‘advances in the population ecology of stream salmonids iv’ in girona, spain, highlighted salmonid research from a broad range of geographical areas and topics. much of the research could be termed ‘conservation biology’ because it dealt with how salmonid populations can be protected or enhanced in the face of mounting anthropogenic pressures such as habitat loss and climate change. it is no surprise that many salmonid ecologists are also conservation biologists – both the biodiversity and the abundances of salmonid populations worldwide have declined precipitously over the past 200 years (licha- towich 1999; behnke 2002; gustafson et al. 2007). these declines mirror the loss of biodiversity on earth in general – humans are now widely recognised as the drivers of the sixth great mass extinction in the pla- net’s history (barnosky et al. 2011; ceballos et al. 2015). accompanying the loss of biodiversity are 50% declines in the abundance of vertebrate popula- tions since 1970 (wwf 2014). stemming the tide of environmental destruction and extinction is considered by some at to be ultimate challenge facing humanity today (ehrlich & ehrlich 2013). in my pre- sentation at the girona symposium, i summarised a recent debate in conservation biology that i believe is highly relevant for conservation biologists, namely the question of ‘why do we conserve nature?’ in this let- ter, i take a closer look at this question, and i explain why i think it is important for us to consider this ques- tion in the course of our daily work (fig. 1). least the recent debate among conservation biologists centred upon what has been termed ‘the new conser- vation’ (soule 2013). much discussion about the core ‘new’ and ‘old’ conservation biology values of followed, in part centred upon why we conserve nature – whether nature should be conserved for its fig. 1. a wild landlocked atlantic salmon smolt from river klar€alven, sweden. this endemic population became landlocked in lake v€anern when the glaciers receded from sweden some 12,000 years ago. historically >25,000 fish were harvested from the river each year during their spawning run. overfishing, habitat loss and hydropower development caused populations to decline as low as 100 wild spawners by the 1970s, but restoration efforts have results in population recovery (piccolo et al. 2012). such locally adapted populations are what rolston (1985, 2012) calls unique evolutionary lineages. he has argued persuasively over the past 30 years that such lineages are dynamic forms that are objec- tively valuable, pursuing a good of their own. extinction wrongly shuts down this life-generating process. we have a duty prevent such extinctions. after 50 years of working on golden trout (oncorhynchus_mykiss aguabonita) restoration, pister (2010) has come to a similar conclusion: there is a growing need to reassess our ethical relationship with nature if conservation is to succeed. (photograph credit r. gow). instrumental value or for its intrinsic value (see tallis et al. 2014 for a summary). instrumental values are those considered to be of use to humans, what we now typically call ecosystem services. intrinsic values are those found in nature itself – values that exist correspondence: j. j. piccolo, river ecology and management group, institute for environmental and life sciences, karlstad university, karlstad 651 81, sweden. e-mail: john.piccolo@kau.se 160 doi: 10.1111/eff.12263 objectively in nature regardless of the existence of human valuers. as the debate progressed, calls for common ground and for ‘inclusive’ conservation were expressed, in which conservation for both instrumen- tal and intrinsic values ought to be accepted (tallis et al. 2014). the call for inclusive conservation was open for signature and signed by over 800 individuals (see diverseconservation.org). the debate continued, however, at the 2015 international society for conser- vation biology meeting, with keynote speakers peter kareiva and clive spash discussing values before a full house of over 1000 delegates (see spash 2015). thing to do? these may seem at first i believe the question of why we conserve nature remains a critically important one for conservation biologists, and one that we have not been particularly successful in answering for the general public. for example, when someone asks you why your univer- sity or agency is spending millions of dollars or euros on some population of trout what is your answer? because it is the law? because it is, or may someday be of value to someone? or simply because it is the right to be purely academic questions, of little practical value in the day-to-day lives of salmonid ecologists. i argue, however, that they are ultimately of supreme impor- tance in the long-term goal of sustaining salmonid biodiversity and production. in his well-known essay ‘the land ethic’ leopold (1949) questioned whether conservation efforts could succeed without an ethical relationship to ‘land’ (what we now call ecosystems) and he envisioned an extension of ethics from human–human to human–land: “that land is a community is the basic concept of ecology, but that land is to be loved and respected is an extension of ethics” this ethical extension, which assigns intrinsic value to nonhuman entities (e.g. animals, species, ecosys- tems), is unprecedented in western philosophy (calli- cott 1986) and has been key issue in environmental ethics since its inception (see rolston 2012). the question of values in nature also lies at the heart of the debate between old and new conserva- tion, and many believe that it has important long-term repercussions for the success of conservation biology (cafaro & primack 2014; soule 2014). although nat- ure’s instrumental values for humans provide valid and powerful justifications for conservation (e.g. kar- eiva 2014), leopold’s (1949) argument was that we need a deeper relationship with nature if conservation is ultimately to succeed: “conservation is getting nowhere because of our abrahamic concept of land. we abuse land because we regard it as a commodity belonging to us. when we see land as a community to which salmonid conservation and the land ethic we belong we may begin to use it with love and respect” much progress has been made in conservation since leopold proposed his land ethic, including the birth of both conservation biology and environmental ethics, new environmental and endangered species legislation, and a vast increase in the general aware- ness of environmental problems. conversely, though, species loss, habitat destruction, anthropogenic cli- mate change and human population increase have spiralled further out of control, and today some con- sider the very existence of the biosphere in peril (ehrlich 2014). if we take our own salmonid case studies as examples, although there have been suc- cess stories of populations conserved or restored, the distributions and abundances of native salmonids declined precipitously during the last century – much of what we discussed in girona dealt with conserving what is left of the historic salmonid biodiversity. so although we have made progress, i share rolston’s (2012) and callicott’s (2014) view that the develop- ment of a new environmental ethic is urgently needed to redefine our relationship to the natural world. we need to revisit and reinforce the land ethic (leopold 1949): “a thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the biotic commu- nity. it is wrong when it tends otherwise” in a landmark essay, soule (1985) posed the ques- tion ‘what is conservation biology?’ in addition to the clear instrumental values of nature, soule pro- posed a series of normative postulates of conserva- tion biology. these postulates explicitly state that nature (evolution and biodiversity) is good and that it has intrinsic value. thus, the land ethic has been incorporated into conservation biology since its inception. such values imply duties – they require us to do what is right. for example, one ought to limit one’s actions so as not to cause unnecessary extinctions (rolston 1985, 1994) or to compromise the integrity of ecosystems (leopold 1949; callicott 2006). but the world has changed in the 30 years since soule’s (1985) essay, and a new generation of conservation biologists has taken the stage. perhaps the normative postulates should be changed to reflect our new worldview of life in the anthro- pocene, where ecosystem services for humans are the main values of biodiversity? the debate about old and new conservation focused largely on this point, i.e., that the most effective way to promote conservation was to appeal to people to protect nat- ure’s instrumental value. should some populations of rare salmonids be allowed to go extinct, given that they probably are not of use to anyone and that 161 piccolo is named after us, isn’t it? besides, too much to protect? in 2012, they cost the u.s. federal government stopped their efforts to recover the connecticut river atlantic salmon, for example (boston globe 2012). perhaps the land ethic and the normative postulates of conservation biology are outdated, developed in a bygone era when biologists na€ıvely believed that nature was good in and of itself? we who live in the anthropocene know that humans are front and centre in this new age – after all isn’t intrinsic value exists it anyway? it impossible to prove that but wait – in the same issue of bioscience in which soule (1985) outlined the normative postulates of conservation biology, rolston (1985) took a first philosophical look at our duties towards endangered species. species – not individual animals – but dynamic processes through time. he called for ‘an unprecedented mix of biological science and ethics’ in developing a species ethic. hitherto, western phi- losophy had attached value only to humans, or more recently to sentient beings (see callicott 2006; rol- ston 2012). philosophers had not ventured to ask whether entities such as species or ecosystems could be assigned intrinsic value. the newly-born discipline of environmental ethics was beginning to search for support for the normative postulates of conservation biology, to answer the question of whether or not nat- ure really was ‘good’. this would encumber upon us a duty to conserve nature regardless of its instrumen- tal value for humans. over the ensuing 30 years, environmental philosophers have been as busy as have conservation biologists – they have been attempting to understand and redefine our ethical relationship to the natural world. i think environmen- tal ethics is even more relevant today than it was when leopold proposed the land ethic, and i think we as conservation biologists need to listen. we need to open our minds to the possibility that values can be objective when the balance of available evidence supports this (rachels 2003). and the balance of evi- dence seems to demonstrate unequivocally that the 3 billion years of continuous life on our planet is a good thing (rolston 1994, 2012). rolston (1991) writes: “environmental ethics requires risk. . .one must hazard the kind of insight that first looks like fool- ishness. some approach environmental ethics with a smile–expecting rights for rocks and chicken lib- eration, misplaced concern for chipmunks and dai- sies. elsewhere, you think, ethicists deal with sober concerns: medical ethics, business ethics, justice in public affairs, questions of life and death, peace and war. but the questions here are no less serious: the degradation of the environment 162 poses as great a threat to life as nuclear war, and a more probable tragedy” i don’t intend here to give a long synthesis of envi- ronmental ethics and the work of philosophers to extend western ethics to include both nonhuman individuals and later species and ecosystems. this topic has been thoroughly reviewed by leading philosophers (e.g. callicott 2006; rolston 2012; see also isee 2015). the upshot is that environmental ethics has expanded our perspective, allowing us to recognise that value may not be strictly human- centred (anthropocentric), but that value can be rea- sonably and logically assigned to nature (biocentric or ecocentric). recognition of values in nature has ranged from sentient beings to all organisms (calli- cott 2006). environmental philosophers then broke new ethical ground by extending valuation beyond individuals, the traditional moral bounds, to species and ecosystems (e.g. rolston 1985; see also rolston 2012). the logical argument is that organisms, and even species, pursue a ‘good’ of their own, that they have intrinsic value. this good may be of a wholly different nature that what we as humans experience – but evolution has given all organisms means by which they preserve themselves. a species is a dynamic form in time and space that ‘strives’ to per- petuate a process (rolston 1985, 1994, 2012). in my opinion, this extension of ethics stands to make a critical contribution to conservation by redefining the way in which we see the world, and our role in it. we are in effect, echoing the words of aldo leopold (1949): “the land ethic simply enlarges the boundaries of the community to include soils, waters, plants, and the land. . . in short, a animals, or collectively: land ethic changes the role of homo sapiens from conqueror of the land-community to plain member and citizen of it. it implies respect for his fellow- members, and also respect for the community as such” perhaps the idea that we are members of the land community comes as no surprise to anyone familiar with darwinian evolution. after all, it was darwin who first gave us back our place in nature with the origin of species. leopold (1949) wondered why more people hadn’t caught on by his time. i wonder the same thing today – does any conservation biolo- gist think we, as humans, crossed some ‘ethical threshold’ back in our distant past, leaping over some imaginary line to become intrinsically valuable? as absurd as that may seem, holding nature as only of instrumental value implies just that – that there is a line somewhere down the evolutionary scale at which species cease to be intrinsically valuable. in the descent of man darwin (1882) himself marvelled over the evolution of our moral sense of duty: “. . .it is summed up in that short but imperious word “ought”, so full of high significance” we stand out in nature because we alone among animals have the ability to assess what is good or bad in a broader sense, i.e., beyond our own needs and pertaining to other individuals, cultures and spe- cies. being the moral species, having evolved to recognise broader value, however, does not imply that we have created value. it seems to me that ‘good’, of the kind experienced by other species, or even by our evolutionary forbearers, existed long before us, and will continue (hopefully) long after we are gone. being the moral species may not imply that we have created value, but it does encumber upon us the duty to uphold value. no modern western society would seriously con- sider a call for ‘inclusive’ human rights – that is that either instrumental or intrinsic value can be adequate justification for ethical treatment of humans. no one would seriously consider, for example, that children ought to be treated ethically solely because of their instrumental value, that is because they may someday grow up to be good citizens. although infants cannot rationalise in the same way as can adults, society recognises no less intrinsic value in a newborn than it does in its’ parents. children are to be cared for because it is our duty, and we are bound by duty to do what is right. over the past 30 years, environmen- tal philosophers have made an indisputable case that nature has intrinsic value. like infants, neither fish nor trees nor species can rationalise. but they clearly have ‘interests’ and they pursue a ‘good’ of their own; the life process is good (rolston 2012). justifi- cation for nature conservation therefore cannot be based upon an ‘either/or’ argument – both instrumen- tal and intrinsic value must be included. i close this letter on a personal note. i spent 10 years as a professional biologist working for land management agencies across western north america. i discussed salmonid conservation with cattle ranch- ers in wyoming, riparian management with native americans in nevada, clear-cutting with loggers and catch quotas with commercial fishers in southeast alaska. i’m not na€ıve enough to believe that human- kind will wake up tomorrow with a universal land ethic. intrinsic value in nature in no way precludes instrumental value – hunting, fishing, ranching and logging are all part of our human heritage as the hun- ter-gatherers we are. taking our place in nature, in fact, necessarily entails that we use nature for our own benefit, its instrumental value. we as humans must pursue good of our own as do all other for salmonid conservation and the land ethic species. being the moral species, however, allows us to see their good as well as our own. it requires us to account for their good as well as ours – to ask the difficult questions about whether or not we have had it too good at the expense of our fellow species. time is running out. the next generation of conser- vation biologists will likely preside over a time when the future of much of the remaining diversity of life on earth will be decided. i believe that conservation biologists must seek for themselves the answer to the question ‘why do we conserve nature?’ those that find themselves convinced, as others have done, that nature is good in and of itself ought to waste no time in expressing for others our duty to do what is right. conservation biologists should lead the way in teach- ing that we ought to conserve nature not only because it is good for us, but simply because it is good. acknowledgements thanks to the teachers, mentors, students and naturalists who have provided thoughtful discussion over the years. special thanks to holmes rolston iii as a teacher and as a source of inspiration through his luminary writing. dedicated to the memory of robert j. behnke for his lifetime’s work in salmo- nid conservation. references anthony, d., barnosky, a.d., matzke, n., tomiya, s., wogan, g.o.u., swartz, b., quental, t.b., marshall, c., mcguire, j.l., lindsey, e.l., maguire, k.c., mersey, b. & ferrer, e.a. 2011. has the earth/’s sixth mass extinction already arrived? nature 471: 51–57. behnke, r.j. 2002. trout and salmon of north america. new york, usa: the free press. boston globe. 2012. us bid to return salmon to connecticut river ends. https://www.bostonglobe.com/lifestyle/health- wellness/2012/08/04/federal-government-abandons-quest-return- salmon-connecticut-river/1kzjiwoylcdqujl4ogiahk/story. htm accessed online 26 july 2015. cafaro, p.j. & primack, r.b. 2014. species extinction is a great moral wrong. biological conservation 170: 1–2. callicott, j.b. 1986. on the intrinsic value of nonhuman spe- cies. in: norton, b.g., ed. the preservation of species. princeton, nj, usa: princeton university press, pp. 138– 172. callicott, j.b. 2006. conservation values and ethics. in: m.j. groom,, g.k. meffe, and c.r. carroll. (eds) principles of conservation biology. sunderland , massachusetts, usa: sinauer, pp. 111–135. callicott, j.b. 2014. thinking like a planet: the land ethic and the earth ethic. oxford, u.k.: oxford university press. ceballos, g., ehrlich, p.r., barnosky, a.d., garcıa, a., prin- gle, r.m. & palmer, t.m. 2015. accelerated modern human–induced species losses: entering the sixth mass extinction. science advances 1: e1400253. 163 rolston, h. iii 1991. environmental ethics: values in and duties to the natural world. in: herbert bormann, f. & kel- lert, s.r., eds. the broken circle: ecology, economics, ethics. new haven, ct: yale university press, pp. 73–97. isbn 0-300-04976-5. rolston, h. iii. 1994. value in nature and the nature of value. in: attfield, r. & belsey, a. eds. philosophy and the natural environment. royal institute of philosophy supplement: 36. cambridge: cambridge university press, pp. 13–30. rolston, h. iii. 2012. a new environmental ethics: the next millennium for life on earth. routledge, usa: new york. soule, m. 1985. what is conservation biology? a new syn- thetic discipline addresses the dynamics and problems of perturbed species, communities, and ecosystems. bioscience 35: 727–734. soule, m. 2013. the “new conservation”. conservation biol- ogy 27: 895–897. soule, m. 2014. also seeking common ground in conserva- tion. conservation biology 28: 637–638. spash, c.l. 2015. bulldozing biodiversity: the economics of offsets and trading-in nature. biological conservation. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2015.07.037 online early. tallis, h., lubchenko, j., et al. 2014. working together: a call for inclusive conservation. nature news 515: 27–28. world wildlife fund (wwf). 2014. living planet report 2014. wwf international, gland: switzerland. isbn 978-2- 940443-87-1. piccolo darwin, c.r. 1882. the descent of man, 2nd edn. amherst, ny: prometheus books 1997. ehrlich, p.r. 2014. conservation biology and the endarken- ment. ambio 43: 847–848. ehrlich, p.r. & ehrlich, a.h. 2013. can a collapse of global civilization be avoided? proceedings of the royal society of london b: biological sciences 280. doi:10.1098/rspb. 2012.2845. gustafson, r.g., waples, r.s., myers, j.m., weitkamp, l.a., bryant, g.j., johnson, o.w. & hard, j.j. 2007. pacific sal- mon extinctions: quantifying lost and remaining diversity. conservation biology 21: 1009–1020. international society for environmental ethics (isee). avail- able at: http://enviroethics.org/ (accessed 27 july 2015). kareiva, p. 2014. new conservation: setting the record straight and finding common ground. conservation biology 28: 634–636. leopold, a. 1949. a sand county almanac, and sketches here and there. new york, usa: oxford university press. lichatowich, j.a. 1999. salmon without rivers: a history of the pacific salmon crisis. washington, dc, usa: island press. piccolo, j.j., norrgård, j.r., greenberg, l.a., schmitz, m. & bergman, e. 2012. conservation of endemic landlocked sal- monids in regulated rivers: a case-study from lake vänern. sweden. fish and fisheries 13(4): 418–433. pister, e.p. 2010. california golden trout: perspectives on restoration and management. fisheries 35: 550–553. rachels, j. 2003. the elements of moral philosophy, 4th edn. new york, usa: mcgraw-hill. rolston, h. iii 1985. duties to endangered species. bios- cience 35: 718–726. 164  